[1] _The Romance of Astronomy_, by H. Macpherson.

[Illustration: FIG. 5.--DIAGRAM SHOWING THE MAIN LAYERS OF THE SUN

Compare with frontispiece.]

[Illustration: _Photo: Royal Observatory, Greenwich._

FIG. 6.--SOLAR PROMINENCES SEEN AT TOTAL SOLAR ECLIPSE, May 29, 1919.
TAKEN AT SOBRAL, BRAZIL.

The small Corona is also visible.]

[Illustration: FIG. 7.--THE VISIBLE SURFACE OF THE SUN

A photograph taken at the Mount Wilson Observatory of the Carnegie
Institution at Washington.]

[Illustration: FIG. 8.--THE SUN

Photographed in the light of glowing hydrogen, at the Mount Wilson
Observatory of the Carnegie Institution of Washington: vortex phenomena
near the spots are especially prominent.]

The fourth and uppermost layer or region is that of the corona, of
immense extent and fading away into the surrounding sky--this we have
already referred to. The diagram (Fig. 5) shows the dispositions of
these various layers of the sun. It is through these several transparent
layers that we see the white light body of the sun.


§ 2

The Surface of the Sun

Here let us return to and see what more we know about the
photosphere--the sun's surface. It is from the photosphere that we have
gained most of our knowledge of the composition of the sun, which is
believed not to be a solid body. Examination of the photosphere shows
that the outer surface is never at rest. Small bright cloudlets come and
go in rapid succession, giving the surface, through contrasts in
luminosity, a granular appearance. Of course, to be visible at all at
92,830,000 miles the cloudlets cannot be small. They imply enormous
activity in the photosphere. If we might speak picturesquely the sun's
surface resembles a boiling ocean of white-hot metal vapours. We have
to-day a wonderful instrument, which will be described later, which
dilutes, as it were, the general glare of the sun, and enables us to
observe these fiery eruptions at any hour. The "oceans" of red-hot gas
and white-hot metal vapour at the sun's surface are constantly driven by
great storms. Some unimaginable energy streams out from the body or
muscles of the sun and blows its outer layers into gigantic shreds, as
it were.

The actual temperature at the sun's surface, or what appears to us to be
the surface--the photosphere--is, of course, unknown, but careful
calculation suggests that it is from 5,000° C. to 7,000° C. The interior
is vastly hotter. We can form no conception of such temperatures as must
exist there. Not even the most obdurate solid could resist such
temperatures, but would be converted almost instantaneously into gas.
But it would not be gas as we know gases on the earth. The enormous
pressures that exist on the sun must convert even gases into thick
treacly fluids. We can only infer this state of matter. It is beyond our
power to reproduce it.


Sun-spots

It is in the brilliant photosphere that the dark areas known as
sun-spots appear. Some of these dark spots--they are dark only by
contrast with the photosphere surrounding them--are of enormous size,
covering many thousands of square miles of surface. What they are we
cannot positively say. They look like great cavities in the sun's
surface. Some think they are giant whirlpools. Certainly they seem to be
great whirling streams of glowing gases with vapours above them and
immense upward and downward currents within them. Round the edges of the
sun-spots rise great tongues of flame.

Perhaps the most popularly known fact about sun-spots is that they are
somehow connected with what we call magnetic storms on earth. These
magnetic storms manifest themselves in interruptions of our telegraphic
and telephonic communications, in violent disturbances of the mariner's
compass, and in exceptional auroral displays. The connection between the
two sets of phenomena cannot be doubted, even although at times there
may be a great spot on the sun without any corresponding "magnetic
storm" effects on the earth.

A surprising fact about sun-spots is that they show definite periodic
variations in number. The best-defined period is one of about eleven
years. During this period the spots increase to a maximum in number and
then diminish to a minimum, the variation being more or less regular.
Now this can only mean one thing. To be periodic the spots must have
some deep-seated connection with the fundamental facts of the sun's
structure and activities. Looked at from this point of view their
importance becomes great.

[Illustration: _Reproduction from "The Forces of Nature"_ (_Messrs.
Macmillan_)

THE AURORA BOREALIS

The aurora borealis is one of the most beautiful spectacles in the sky.
The colours and shape change every instant; sometimes a fan-like cluster
of rays, at other times long golden draperies gliding one over the
other. Blue, green, yellow, red, and white combine to give a glorious
display of colour. The theory of its origin is still, in part, obscure,
but there can be no doubt that the aurora is related to the magnetic
phenomena of the earth and therefore is connected with the electrical
influence of the sun.]

It is from the study of sun-spots that we have learned that the sun's
surface does not appear to rotate all at the same speed. The
"equatorial" regions are rotating quicker than regions farther north or
south. A point forty-five degrees from the equator seems to take about
two and a half days longer to complete one rotation than a point on the
equator. This, of course, confirms our belief that the sun cannot be a
solid body.

What is its composition? We know that there are present, in a gaseous
state, such well-known elements as sodium, iron, copper, zinc, and
magnesium; indeed, we know that there is practically every element in
the sun that we know to be in the earth. How do we know?

It is from the photosphere, as has been said, that we have won most of
our knowledge of the sun. The instrument used for this purpose is the
spectroscope; and before proceeding to deal further with the sun and the
source of its energy it will be better to describe this instrument.


A WONDERFUL INSTRUMENT AND WHAT IT REVEALS

The spectroscope is an instrument for analysing light. So important is
it in the revelations it has given us that it will be best to describe
it fully. Every substance to be examined must first be made to glow,
made luminous; and as nearly everything in the heavens _is_ luminous the
instrument has a great range in Astronomy. And when we speak of
analysing light, we mean that the light may be broken up into waves of
different lengths. What we call light is a series of minute waves in
ether, and these waves are--measuring them from crest to crest, so to
say--of various lengths. Each wave-length corresponds to a colour of the
rainbow. The shortest waves give us a sensation of violet colour, and
the largest waves cause a sensation of red. The rainbow, in fact, is a
sort of natural spectrum. (The meaning of the rainbow is that the
moisture-laden air has sorted out these waves, in the sun's light,
according to their length.) Now the simplest form of spectroscope is a
glass prism--a triangular-shaped piece of glass. If white light
(sunlight, for example) passes through a glass prism, we see a series of
rainbow-tinted colours. Anyone can notice this effect when sunlight is
shining through any kind of cut glass--the stopper of a wine decanter,
for instance. If, instead of catching with the eye the coloured lights
as they emerge from the glass prism, we allow them to fall on a screen,
we shall find that they pass, by continuous gradations, from red at the
one end of the screen, through orange, yellow, green, blue, and indigo,
to violet at the other end. _In other words, what we call white light is
composed of rays of these several colours. They go to make up the effect
which we call white._ And now just as water can be split up into its two
elements, oxygen and hydrogen, so sunlight can be broken up into its
primary colours, which are those we have just mentioned.

This range of colours, produced by the spectroscope, we call the solar
spectrum, and these are, from the spectroscopic point of view, primary
colours. Each shade of colour has its definite position in the spectrum.
That is to say, the light of each shade of colour (corresponding to its
wave-length) is reflected through a certain fixed angle on passing
through the glass prism. Every possible kind of light has its definite
position, and is denoted by a number which gives the wave-length of the
vibrations constituting that particular kind of light.

Now, other kinds of light besides sunlight can be analysed. Light
from any substance which has been made incandescent may be observed with
the spectroscope in the same way, and each element can be thus
separated. It is found that each substance (in the same conditions of
pressure, etc.) gives a constant spectrum of its own. _Each metal
displays its own distinctive colour. It is obvious, therefore, that the
spectrum provides the means for identifying a particular substance._ It
was by this method that we discovered in the sun the presence of such
well-known elements as sodium, iron, copper, zinc, and magnesium.

[Illustration: _Yerkes Observatory._

FIG. 9.--THE GREAT SUN-SPOT OF JULY 17, 1905]

[Illustration: _From photographs taken at the Yerkes Observatory._

FIG. 10.--SOLAR PROMINENCES

These are about 60,000 miles in height. The two photographs show the
vast changes occurring in ten minutes. October 10, 1910.]

[Illustration: _Photo: Mount Wilson Observatory._

FIG. 11.--MARS, October 5, 1909

Showing the dark markings and the Polar Cap.]

[Illustration: FIG. 12.--JUPITER

Showing the belts which are probably cloud formations.]

[Illustration: _Photo: Professor E. E. Barnard, Yerkes Observatory._

FIG. 13.--SATURN, November 19, 1911

Showing the rings, mighty swarms of meteorites.]

Every chemical element known, then, has a distinctive spectrum of its
own when it is raised to incandescence, and this distinctive spectrum is
as reliable a means of identification for the element as a human face is
for its owner. Whether it is a substance glowing in the laboratory or in
a remote star makes no difference to the spectroscope; if the light of
any substance reaches it, that substance will be recognised and
identified by the characteristic set of waves.

The spectrum of a glowing mass of gas will consist in a number of bright
lines of various colours, and at various intervals; corresponding to
each kind of gas, there will be a peculiar and distinctive arrangement
of bright lines. But if the light from such a mass of glowing gas be
made to pass through a cool mass of the _same_ gas it will be found that
dark lines replace the bright lines in the spectrum, the reason for this
being that the cool gas absorbs the rays of light emitted by the hot
gas. Experiments of this kind enable us to reach the important general
statement that every gas, when cold, absorbs the same rays of light
which it emits when hot.

Crossing the solar spectrum are hundreds and hundreds of dark lines.
These could not at first be explained, because this fact of
discriminative absorption was not known. We understand now. The sun's
white light comes from the photosphere, but between us and the
photosphere there is, as we have seen, another solar envelope of
relatively cooler vapours--the reversing layer. Each constituent
element in this outer envelope stops its own kind of light, that is, the
kind of light made by incandescent atoms of the same element in the
photosphere. The "stoppages" register themselves in the solar spectrum
as dark lines placed exactly where the corresponding bright lines would
have been. The explanation once attained, dark lines became as
significant as bright lines. The secret of the sun's composition was
out. We have found practically every element in the sun that we know to
be in the earth. We have identified an element in the sun before we were
able to isolate it on the earth. We have been able even to point to the
coolest places on the sun, the centres of sun-spots, where alone the
temperature seems to have fallen sufficiently low to allow chemical
compounds to form.

It is thus we have been able to determine what the stars, comets, or
nebulæ are made of.


A Unique Discovery

In 1868 Sir Norman Lockyer detected a light coming from the prominences
of the sun which was not given by any substance known on earth, and
attributed this to an unknown gas which he called helium, from the Greek
_helios_, the sun. _In 1895 Sir William Ramsay discovered in certain
minerals the same gas identified by the spectroscope._ We can say,
therefore, that this gas was discovered in the sun nearly thirty years
before it was found on earth; this discovery of the long-lost heir is as
thrilling a chapter in the detective story of science as any in the
sensational stories of the day, and makes us feel quite certain that our
methods really tell us of what elements sun and stars are built up. The
light from the corona of the sun, as we have mentioned indicates a gas
still unknown on earth, which has been christened Coronium.


Measuring the Speed of Light

But this is not all; soon a new use was found for the spectroscope. We
found that we could measure with it the most difficult of all speeds
to measure, speed in the line of sight. Movement at right angles to the
direction in which one is looking is, if there is sufficient of it, easy
to detect, and, if the distance of the moving body is known, easy to
measure. But movement in the line of vision is both difficult to detect
and difficult to measure. Yet, even at the enormous distances with which
astronomers have to deal, the spectroscope can detect such movement and
furnish data for its measurement. If a luminous body containing, say,
sodium is moving rapidly towards the spectroscope, it will be found that
the sodium lines in the spectrum have moved slightly from their usual
definite positions towards the violet end of the spectrum, the amount of
the change of position increasing with the speed of the luminous body.
If the body is moving away from the spectroscope the shifting of the
spectral lines will be in the opposite direction, towards the red end of
the spectrum. In this way we have discovered and measured movements that
otherwise would probably not have revealed themselves unmistakably to us
for thousands of years. In the same way we have watched, and measured
the speed of, tremendous movements on the sun, and so gained proof that
the vast disturbances we should expect there actually do occur.

[Illustration: THE SPECTROSCOPE IS AN INSTRUMENT FOR ANALYSING LIGHT; IT
PROVIDES THE MEANS FOR IDENTIFYING DIFFERENT SUBSTANCES

This pictorial diagram illustrates the principal of Spectrum Analysis,
showing how sunlight is decomposed into its primary colours. What we
call white light is composed of seven different colours. The diagram is
relieved of all detail which would unduly obscure the simple process by
which a ray of light is broken up by a prism into different
wave-lengths. The spectrum rays have been greatly magnified.]


IS THE SUN DYING?

§ 3

Now let us return to our consideration of the sun.

To us on the earth the most patent and most astonishing fact about the
sun is its tremendous energy. Heat and light in amazing quantities pour
from it without ceasing.

Where does this energy come from? Enormous jets of red glowing gases can
be seen shooting outwards from the sun, like flames from a fire, for
thousands of miles. Does this argue fire, as we know fire on the earth?
On this point the scientist is sure. The sun is not burning, and
combustion is not the source of its heat. Combustion is a chemical
reaction between atoms. The conditions that make it possible are known
and the results are predictable and measurable. But no chemical reaction
of the nature of combustion as we know it will explain the sun's energy,
nor indeed will any ordinary chemical reaction of any kind. If the sun
were composed of combustible material throughout and the conditions of
combustion as we understand them were always present, the sun would burn
itself out in some thousands of years, with marked changes in its heat
and light production as the process advanced. There is no evidence of
such changes. There is, instead, strong evidence that the sun has been
emitting light and heat in prodigious quantities, not for thousands, but
for millions of years. Every addition to our knowledge that throws light
on the sun's age seems to make for increase rather than decrease of its
years. This makes the wonder of its energy greater.

And we cannot avoid the issue of the source of the energy by saying
merely that the sun is gradually radiating away an energy that
originated in some unknown manner, away back at the beginning of things.
Reliable calculations show that the years required for the mere cooling
of a globe like the sun could not possibly run to millions. In other
words, the sun's energy must be subject to continuous and more or less
steady renewal. However it may have acquired its enormous energy in the
past, it must have some source of energy in the present.

The best explanation that we have to-day of this continuous accretion of
energy is that it is due to shrinkage of the sun's bulk under the force
of gravity. Gravity is one of the most mysterious forces of nature, but
it is an obvious fact that bodies behave as if they attracted one
another, and Newton worked out the law of this attraction. We may say,
without trying to go too deeply into things, that every particle of
matter attracts every other throughout the universe. If the diameter of
the sun were to shrink by one mile all round, this would mean that all
the millions of tons in the outer one-mile thickness would have a
straight drop of one mile towards the centre. And that is not all,
because obviously the layers below this outer mile would also drop
inwards, each to a less degree than the one above it. What a tremendous
movement of matter, however slowly it might take place! And what a
tremendous energy would be involved! Astronomers calculate that the
above shrinkage of one mile all round would require fifty years for its
completion, assuming, reasonably, that there is close and continuous
relationship between loss of heat by radiation and shrinkage. Even if
this were true we need not feel over-anxious on this theory; before the
sun became too cold to support life many millions of years would be
required.

It was suggested at one time that falls of meteoric matter into the sun
would account for the sun's heat. This position is hardly tenable now.
The mere bulk of the meteoric matter required by the hypothesis, apart
from other reasons, is against it. There is undoubtedly an enormous
amount of meteoric matter moving about within the bounds of the solar
system, but most of it seems to be following definite routes round the
sun like the planets. The stray erratic quantities destined to meet
their doom by collision with the sun can hardly be sufficient to account
for the sun's heat.

Recent study of radio-active bodies has suggested another factor that
may be working powerfully along with the force of gravitation to
maintain the sun's store of heat. In radio-active bodies certain atoms
seem to be undergoing disintegration. These atoms appear to be splitting
up into very minute and primitive constituents. But since matter may be
split up into such constituents, may it not be built up from them?

The question is whether these "radio-active" elements are undergoing
disintegration, or formation, in the sun. If they are undergoing
disintegration--and the sun itself is undoubtedly radio-active--then we
have another source of heat for the sun that will last indefinitely.


