[Illustration: FIG. 17.--A MAP OF THE CHIEF PLAINS AND CRATERS OF THE
MOON

The plains were originally supposed to be seas: hence the name "Mare."]

[Illustration: FIG. 18.--A DIAGRAM OF A STREAM OF METEORS SHOWING THE
EARTH PASSING THROUGH THEM] [Illustration: _Photo: Royal Observatory,
Greenwich._

FIG. 19.--COMET, September 29, 1908

Notice the tendency to form a number of tails. (See photograph below.)]

[Illustration: _Photo: Royal Observatory, Greenwich._

FIG. 20.--COMET, October 3, 1908

The process has gone further and a number of distinct tails can now be
counted.]

But there are many things that point to absence of air on the moon. Even
the photographs we reproduce tell the same story. The edges of the
shadows are all hard and black. If there had been an appreciable
atmosphere it would have scattered the sun's light on to the edges and
produced a gradual shading off such as we see on the earth. This
relative absence of air must give rise to some surprising effects. There
will be no sounds on the moon, because sounds are merely air waves. Even
a meteor shattering itself to a violent end against the surface of the
moon would make no noise. Nor would it herald its coming by glowing into
a "shooting star," as it would on entering the earth's atmosphere. There
will be no floating dust, no scent, no twilight, no blue sky, no
twinkling of the stars. The sky will be always black and the stars will
be clearly visible by day as by night. The sun's wonderful corona, which
no man on earth, even by seizing every opportunity during eclipses, can
hope to see for more than two hours in all in a long lifetime, will be
visible all day. So will the great red flames of the sun. Of course,
there will be no life, and no landscape effects and scenery effects due
to vegetation.

The moon takes approximately twenty-seven of our days to turn once on
its axis. So for fourteen days there is continuous night, when the
temperature must sink away down towards the absolute cold of space. This
will be followed without an instant of twilight by full daylight. For
another fourteen days the sun's rays will bear straight down, with no
diffusion or absorption of their heat, or light, on the way. It does not
follow, however, that the temperature of the moon's surface must rise
enormously. It may not even rise to the temperature of melting ice.
Seeing there is no air there can be no check on radiation. The heat that
the moon gets will radiate away immediately. We know that amongst the
coldest places on the earth are the tops of very high mountains, the
points that have reared themselves nearest to the sun but farthest out
of the sheltering blanket of the earth's atmosphere. The actual
temperature of the moon's surface by day is a moot point. It may be
below the freezing-point or above the boiling-point of water.


The Mountains of the Moon

The lack of air is considered by many astronomers to furnish the
explanation of the enormous number of "craters" which pit the moon's
surface. There are about a hundred thousand of these strange rings, and
it is now believed by many that they are spots where very large
meteorites, or even planetoids, splashed into the moon when its surface
was still soft. Other astronomers think that they are the remains of
gigantic bubbles which were raised in the moon's "skin," when the globe
was still molten, by volcanic gases from below. A few astronomers think
that they are, as is popularly supposed, the craters of extinct
volcanoes. Our craters, on the earth, are generally deep cups, whereas
these ring-formations on the moon are more like very shallow and broad
saucers. Clavius, the largest of them, is 123 miles across the interior,
yet its encircling rampart is not a mile high.

The mountains on the moon (Fig. 16) rise to a great height, and are
extraordinarily gaunt and rugged. They are like fountains of lava,
rising in places to 26,000 and 27,000 feet. The lunar Apennines have
three thousand steep and weird peaks. Our terrestrial mountains are
continually worn down by frost acting on moisture and by ice and water,
but there are none of these agencies operating on the moon. Its
mountains are comparatively "everlasting hills."

The moon is interesting to us precisely because it is a dead world. It
seems to show how the earth, or any cooling metal globe, will evolve in
the remote future. We do not know if there was ever life on the moon,
but in any case it cannot have proceeded far in development. At the most
we can imagine some strange lowly forms of vegetation lingering here and
there in pools of heavy gas, expanding during the blaze of the sun's
long day, and frozen rigid during the long night.


METEORS AND COMETS

We may conclude our survey of the solar system with a word about
"shooting stars," or meteors, and comets. There are few now who do not
know that the streak of fire which suddenly lights the sky overhead at
night means that a piece of stone or iron has entered our atmosphere
from outer space, and has been burned up by friction. It was travelling
at, perhaps, twenty or thirty miles a second. At seventy or eighty miles
above our heads it began to glow, as at that height the air is thick
enough to offer serious friction and raise it to a white heat. By the
time the meteor reached about twenty miles or so from the earth's
surface it was entirely dissipated, as a rule in fiery vapour.


Millions of Meteorites

It is estimated that between ten and a hundred million meteorites enter
our atmosphere and are cremated, every day. Most of them weigh only an
ounce or two, and are invisible. Some of them weigh a ton or more, but
even against these large masses the air acts as a kind of "torpedo-net."
They generally burst into fragments and fall without doing damage.

It is clear that "empty space" is, at least within the limits of our
solar system, full of these things. They swarm like fishes in the seas.
Like the fishes, moreover, they may be either solitary or gregarious.
The solitary bit of cosmic rubbish is the meteorite, which we have just
examined. A "social" group of meteorites is the essential part of a
comet. The nucleus, or bright central part, of the head of a comet (Fig.
19) consists of a swarm, sometimes thousands of miles wide, of these
pieces of iron or stone. This swarm has come under the sun's
gravitational influence, and is forced to travel round it. From some
dark region of space it has moved slowly into our system. It is not then
a comet, for it has no tail. But as the crowded meteors approach the
sun, the speed increases. They give off fine vapour-like matter and the
fierce flood of light from the sun sweeps this vapour out in an
ever-lengthening tail. Whatever way the comet is travelling, the tail
always points away from the sun.


A Great Comet

The vapoury tail often grows to an enormous length as the comet
approaches the sun. The great comet of 1843 had a tail two hundred
million miles long. It is, however, composed of the thinnest vapours
imaginable. Twice during the nineteenth century the earth passed through
the tail of a comet, and nothing was felt. The vapours of the tail are,
in fact, so attenuated that we can hardly imagine them to be white-hot.
They may be lit by some electrical force. However that may be, the comet
dashes round the sun, often at three or four hundred miles a second,
then may pass gradually out of our system once more. It may be a
thousand years, or it may be fifty years, before the monarch of the
system will summon it again to make its fiery journey round his throne.

[Illustration: _Photo: Harvard College Observatory._

FIG. 21.--TYPICAL SPECTRA

Six main types of stellar spectra. Notice the lines they have in common,
showing what elements are met with in different types of stars. Each of
these spectra corresponds to a different set of physical and chemical
conditions.] [Illustration: _Photo: Mount Wilson Observatory._

FIG. 22.--A NEBULAR REGION SOUTH OF ZETA ORIONIS

Showing a great projection of "dark matter" cutting off the light from
behind.]

[Illustration: _Photo: Astrophysical Observatory, Victoria, British
Columbia._

FIG. 23.--STAR CLUSTER IN HERCULES

A wonderful cluster of stars. It has been estimated that the distance of
this cluster is such that it would take light more than 100,000 years to
reach us.]


THE STELLAR UNIVERSE

§ 1

The immensity of the Stellar Universe, as we have seen, is beyond our
apprehension. The sun is nothing more than a very ordinary star, perhaps
an insignificant one. There are stars enormously greater than the sun.
One such, Betelgeux, has recently been measured, and its diameter is
more than 300 times that of the sun.


The Evolution of Stars

The proof of the similarity between our sun and the stars has come to us
through the spectroscope. The elements that we find by its means in the
sun are also found in the same way in the stars. Matter, says the
spectroscope, is essentially the same everywhere, in the earth and the
sun, in the comet that visits us once in a thousand years, in the star
whose distance is incalculable, and in the great clouds of "fire-mist"
that we call nebulæ.

In considering the evolution of the stars let us keep two points clearly
in mind. The starting-point, the nebula, is no figment of the scientific
imagination. Hundreds of thousands of nebulæ, besides even vaster
irregular stretches of nebulous matter, exist in the heavens. But the
stages of the evolution of this stuff into stars are very largely a
matter of speculation. Possibly there is more than one line of
evolution, and the various theories may be reconciled. And this applies
also to the theories of the various stages through which the stars
themselves pass on their way to extinction.

The light of about a quarter of a million stars has been analysed in the
spectroscope, and it is found that they fall into about a dozen classes
which generally correspond to stages in their evolution (Fig. 21).


The Age of Stars

In its main lines the spectrum of a star corresponds to its colour, and
we may roughly group the stars into red, yellow, and white. This is also
the order of increasing temperature, the red stars being the coolest and
the white stars the hottest. We might therefore imagine that the white
stars are the youngest, and that as they grow older and cooler they
become yellowish, then red, and finally become invisible--just as a
cooling white-hot iron would do. But a very interesting recent research
shows that there are two kinds of red stars; some of them are amongst
the oldest stars and some are amongst the youngest. The facts appear to
be that when a star is first formed it is not very hot. It is an immense
mass of diffuse gas glowing with a dull-red heat. It contracts under the
mutual gravitation of its particles, and as it does so it grows hotter.
It acquires a yellowish tinge. As it continues to contract it grows
hotter and hotter until its temperature reaches a maximum as a white
star. At this point the contraction process does not stop, but the
heating process does. Further contraction is now accompanied by cooling,
and the star goes through its colour changes again, but this time in the
inverse order. It contracts and cools to yellow and finally to red. But
when it again becomes a red star it is enormously denser and smaller
than when it began as a red star. Consequently the red stars are divided
into two classes called, appropriately, Giants and Dwarfs. This theory,
which we owe to an American astronomer, H. N. Russell, has been
successful in explaining a variety of phenomena, and there is
consequently good reason to suppose it to be true. But the question as
to how the red giant stars were formed has received less satisfactory
and precise answers.

The most commonly accepted theory is the nebular theory.


THE NEBULAR THEORY

§ 2

Nebulæ are dim luminous cloud-like patches in the heavens, more like
wisps of smoke in some cases than anything else. Both photography and
the telescope show that they are very numerous, hundreds of thousands
being already known and the number being continually added to. They are
not small. Most of them are immensely large. Actual dimensions cannot be
given, because to estimate these we must first know definitely the
distance of the nebulæ from the earth. The distances of some nebulæ are
known approximately, and we can therefore form some idea of size in
these cases. The results are staggering. The mere visible surface of
some nebulæ is so large that the whole stretch of the solar system would
be too small to form a convenient unit for measuring it. A ray of light
would require to travel for years to cross from side to side of such a
nebula. Its immensity is inconceivable to the human mind.

There appear to be two types of nebulæ, and there is evidence suggesting
that the one type is only an earlier form of the other; but this again
we do not know.

The more primitive nebulæ would seem to be composed of gas in an
extremely rarified form. It is difficult to convey an adequate idea of
the rarity of nebular gases. The residual gases in a vacuum tube are
dense by comparison. A cubic inch of air at ordinary pressure would
contain more matter than is contained in millions of cubic inches of the
gases of nebulæ. The light of even the faintest stars does not seem to
be dimmed by passing through a gaseous nebula, although we cannot be
sure on this point. The most remarkable physical fact about these gases
is that they are luminous. Whence they derive their luminosity we do not
know. It hardly seems possible to believe that extremely thin gases
exposed to the terrific cold of space can be so hot as to be luminous
and can retain their heat and their luminosity indefinitely. A cold
luminosity due to electrification, like that of the aurora borealis,
would seem to fit the case better.

Now the nebular theory is that out of great "fire-mists," such as we
have described, stars are born. We do not know whether gravitation is
the only or even the main force at work in a nebula, but it is supposed
that under the action of gravity the far-flung "fire-mists" would begin
to condense round centres of greatest density, heat being evolved in the
process. Of course the condensation would be enormously slow, although
the sudden irruption of a swarm of meteors or some solid body might
hasten matters greatly by providing large, ready-made centres of
condensation.


Spiral Nebulæ

It is then supposed that the contracting mass of gas would begin to
rotate and to throw off gigantic streamers, which would in their turn
form centres of condensation. The whole structure would thus form a
spiral, having a dense region at its centre and knots or lumps of
condensed matter along its spiral arms. Besides the formless gaseous
nebulæ there are hundreds of thousands of "spiral" nebulæ such as we
have just mentioned in the heavens. They are at all stages of
development, and they are visible to us at all angles--that is to say,
some of them face directly towards us, others are edge on, and some are
in intermediate positions. It appears, therefore, that we have here a
striking confirmation of the nebular hypothesis. But we must not go so
fast. There is much controversy as to the nature of these spiral nebulæ.
Some eminent astronomers think they are other stellar universes,
comparable in size with our own. In any case they are vast structures,
and if they represent stars in process of condensation, they must be
giving birth to huge agglomerations of stars--to star clusters at least.
These vast and enigmatic objects do not throw much light on the origin
of our own solar system. The nebular hypothesis, which was invented
by Laplace to explain the origin of our solar system, has not yet met
with universal acceptance. The explanation offers grave difficulties,
and it is best while the subject is still being closely investigated, to
hold all opinions with reserve. It may be taken as probable, however,
that the universe has developed from masses of incandescent gas.

[Illustration: _Photo: Yerkes Observatory._

FIG. 24.--THE GREAT NEBULA IN ORION

The most impressive nebula in the heavens. It is inconceivably greater
in dimensions than the whole solar system.]

[Illustration: _Photo: Lick Observatory._

FIG. 25--GIANT SPIRAL NEBULA, March 23, 1914

This spiral nebula is seen full on. Notice the central nucleus and the
two spiral arms emerging from its opposite directions. Is matter flowing
out of the nucleus into the arms or along the arms into the nucleus? In
either case we should get two streams in opposite directions within the
nucleus.]