II

THE STORY OF EVOLUTION




INTRODUCTORY

THE BEGINNING OF THE EARTH--MAKING A HOME FOR LIFE--THE FIRST LIVING
CREATURES


§ 1

The Evolution-idea is a master-key that opens many doors. It is a
luminous interpretation of the world, throwing the light of the past
upon the present. Everything is seen to be an antiquity, with a history
behind it--a _natural history_, which enables us to understand in some
measure how it has come to be as it is. We cannot say more than
"understand in some measure," for while the _fact_ of evolution is
certain, we are only beginning to discern the _factors_ that have been
at work.

The evolution-idea is very old, going back to some of the Greek
philosophers, but it is only in modern times that it has become an
essential part of our mental equipment. It is now an everyday
intellectual tool. It was applied to the origin of the solar system and
to the making of the earth before it was applied to plants and animals;
it was extended from these to man himself; it spread to language, to
folk-ways, to institutions. Within recent years the evolution-idea has
been applied to the chemical elements, for it appears that uranium may
change into radium, that radium may produce helium, and that lead is the
final stable result when the changes of uranium are complete. Perhaps
all the elements may be the outcome of an inorganic evolution. Not less
important is the extension of the evolution-idea to the world within as
well as to the world without. For alongside of the evolution of bodies
and brains is the evolution of feelings and emotions, ideas and
imagination.

Organic evolution means that the present is the child of the past and
the parent of the future. It is not a power or a principle; it is a
process--a process of becoming. It means that the present-day animals
and plants and all the subtle inter-relations between them have arisen
in a natural knowable way from a preceding state of affairs on the whole
somewhat simpler, and that again from forms and inter-relations simpler
still, and so on backwards and backwards for millions of years till we
lose all clues in the thick mist that hangs over life's beginnings.

Our solar system was once represented by a nebula of some sort, and we
may speak of the evolution of the sun and the planets. But since it has
been _the same material throughout_ that has changed in its distribution
and forms, it might be clearer to use some word like genesis. Similarly,
our human institutions were once very different from what they are now,
and we may speak of the evolution of government or of cities. But Man
works with a purpose, with ideas and ideals in some measure controlling
his actions and guiding his achievements, so that it is probably clearer
to keep the good old word history for all processes of social becoming
in which man has been a conscious agent. Now between the genesis of the
solar system and the history of civilisation there comes the vast
process of organic evolution. The word development should be kept for
the becoming of the individual, the chick out of the egg, for instance.

Organic evolution is a continuous natural process of racial change, by
successive steps in a definite direction, whereby distinctively new
individualities arise, take root, and flourish, sometimes alongside of,
and sometimes, sooner or later, in place of, the originative stock. Our
domesticated breeds of pigeons and poultry are the results of
evolutionary change whose origins are still with us in the Rock Dove and
the Jungle Fowl; but in most cases in Wild Nature the ancestral stocks
of present-day forms are long since extinct, and in many cases they are
unknown. Evolution is a long process of coming and going, appearing and
disappearing, a long-drawn-out sublime process like a great piece of
music.

[Illustration: _Photo: Rischgitz Collection._

CHARLES DARWIN

Greatest of naturalists, who made the idea of evolution current
intellectual coin, and in his _Origin of Species_ (1859) made the whole
world new.]

[Illustration: _Photo: Rischgitz Collection._

LORD KELVIN

One of the greatest physicists of the nineteenth century. He estimated
the age of the earth at 20,000,000 years. He had not at his disposal,
however, the knowledge of recent discoveries, which have resulted in
this estimate being very greatly increased.]

[Illustration: _Photo: Lick Observatory._

A GIANT SPIRAL NEBULA

Laplace's famous theory was that the planets and the earth were formed
from great whirling nebulæ.]

[Illustration: _Photo: Natural History Museum._

METEORITE WHICH FELL NEAR SCARBOROUGH, AND IS NOW TO BE SEEN IN THE
NATURAL HISTORY MUSEUM

It weighs about 56 lb., and is a "stony" meteorite, i.e., an aerolite.]


§ 2

The Beginning of the Earth

When we speak the language of science we cannot say "In the beginning,"
for we do not know of and cannot think of any condition of things that
did not arise from something that went before. But we may qualify the
phrase, and legitimately inquire into the beginning of the earth within
the solar system. If the result of this inquiry is to trace the sun and
the planets back to a nebula we reach only a relative beginning. The
nebula has to be accounted for. And even before matter there may have
been a pre-material world. If we say, as was said long ago, "In the
beginning was Mind," we may be expressing or trying to express a great
truth, but we have gone BEYOND SCIENCE.


The Nebular Hypothesis

One of the grandest pictures that the scientific mind has ever thrown
upon the screen is that of the Nebular Hypothesis. According to
Laplace's famous form of this theory (1796), the solar system was once a
gigantic glowing mass, spinning slowly and uniformly around its centre.
As the incandescent world-cloud of gas cooled and its speed of rotation
increased the shrinking mass gave off a separate whirling ring, which
broke up and gathered together again as the first and most distant
planet. The main mass gave off another ring and another till all the
planets, including the earth, were formed. The central mass persisted as
the sun.

Laplace spoke of his theory, which Kant had anticipated forty-one years
before, with scientific caution: "conjectures which I present with all
the distrust which everything not the result of observation or of
calculation ought to inspire." Subsequent research justified his
distrust, for it has been shown that the original nebula need not have
been hot and need not have been gaseous. Moreover, there are great
difficulties in Laplace's theory of the separation of successive rings
from the main mass, and of the condensation of a whirling gaseous ring
into a planet.

So it has come about that the picture of a hot gaseous nebula revolving
as a unit body has given place to other pictures. Thus Sir Norman
Lockyer pointed out (1890) that the earth is gathering to itself
millions of meteorites every day; this has been going on for millions of
years; in distant ages the accretion may have been vastly more rapid and
voluminous; and so the earth has grown! Now the meteoritic contributions
are undoubted, but they require a centre to attract them, and the
difficulty is to account for the beginning of a collecting centre or
planetary nucleus. Moreover, meteorites are sporadic and erratic,
scattered hither and thither rather than collecting into unit-bodies. As
Professor Chamberlin says, "meteorites have rather the characteristics
of the wreckage of some earlier organisation than of the parentage of
our planetary system." Several other theories have been propounded to
account for the origin of the earth, but the one that has found most
favour in the eyes of authorities is that of Chamberlin and Moulton.
According to this theory a great nebular mass condensed to form the sun,
from which under the attraction of passing stars planet after planet,
the earth included, was heaved off in the form of knotted spiral nebulæ,
like many of those now observed in the heavens.

Of great importance were the "knots," for they served as collecting
centres drawing flying matter into their clutches. Whatever part of the
primitive bolt escaped and scattered was drawn out into independent
orbits round the sun, forming the "planetesimals" which behave like
minute planets. These planetesimals formed the food on which the knots
subsequently fed.


The Growth of the Earth

It has been calculated that the newborn earth--the "earth-knot" of
Chamberlin's theory--had a diameter of about 5,500 miles. But it grew
by drawing planetesimals into itself until it had a diameter of over
8,100 miles at the end of its growing period. Since then it has shrunk,
by periodic shrinkages which have meant the buckling up of successive
series of mountains, and it has now a diameter of 7,918 miles. But
during the shrinking the earth became more varied.

A sort of slow boiling of the internally hot earth often forced molten
matter through the cold outer crust, and there came about a gradual
assortment of lighter materials nearer the surface and heavier materials
deeper down. The continents are built of the lighter materials, such as
granites, while the beds of the great oceans are made of the heavier
materials such as basalts. In limited areas land has often become sea,
and sea has often given place to land, but the probability is that the
distinction of the areas corresponding to the great continents and
oceans goes back to a very early stage.

The lithosphere is the more or less stable crust of the earth, which may
have been, to begin with, about fifty miles in thickness. It seems that
the young earth had no atmosphere, and that ages passed before water
began to accumulate on its surface--before, in other words, there was
any hydrosphere. The water came from the earth itself, to begin with,
and it was long before there was any rain dissolving out saline matter
from the exposed rocks and making the sea salt. The weathering of the
high grounds of the ancient crust by air and water furnished the
material which formed the sandstones and mudstones and other sedimentary
rocks, which are said to amount to a thickness of over fifty miles in
all.


§ 3

Making a Home for Life

It is interesting to inquire how the callous, rough-and-tumble
conditions of the outer world in early days were replaced by others that
allowed of the germination and growth of that tender plant we call
LIFE. There are very tough living creatures, but the average organism is
ill suited for violence. Most living creatures are adapted to mild
temperatures and gentle reactions. Hence the fundamental importance of
the early atmosphere, heavy with planetesimal dust, in blanketing the
earth against intensities of radiance from without, as Chamberlin says,
and inequalities of radiance from within. This was the first preparation
for life, but it was an atmosphere without free oxygen. Not less
important was the appearance of pools and lakelets, of lakes and seas.
Perhaps the early waters covered the earth. And water was the second
preparation for life--water, that can dissolve a larger variety of
substances in greater concentration than any other liquid; water, that
in summer does not readily evaporate altogether from a pond, nor in
winter freeze throughout its whole extent; water, that is such a mobile
vehicle and such a subtle cleaver of substances; water, that forms over
80 per cent. of living matter itself.

Of great significance was the abundance of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen
(in the form of carbonic acid and water) in the atmosphere of the
cooling earth, for these three wonderful elements have a unique
_ensemble_ of properties--ready to enter into reactions and relations,
making great diversity and complexity possible, favouring the formation
of the plastic and permeable materials that build up living creatures.
We must not pursue the idea, but it is clear that the stones and mortar
of the inanimate world are such that they built a friendly home for
life.


Origin of Living Creatures upon the Earth

During the early chapters of the earth's history, no living creature
that we can imagine could possibly have lived there. The temperature was
too high; there was neither atmosphere nor surface water. Therefore it
follows that at some uncertain, but inconceivably distant date, living
creatures appeared upon the earth. No one knows how, but it is
interesting to consider possibilities.

[Illustration: _Reproduced from the Smithsonian Report, 1915._

A LIMESTONE CANYON

Many fossils of extinct animals have been found in such rock
formations.]

[Illustration: GENEALOGICAL TREE OF ANIMALS

Showing in order of evolution the general relations of the chief classes
into which the world of living things is divided. This scheme represents
the present stage of our knowledge, but is admittedly provisional.]

[Illustration: DIAGRAM OF AMOEBA

(Greatly magnified.)

The amoeba is one of the simplest of all animals, and gives us a hint
of the original ancestors. It looks like a tiny irregular speck of
greyish jelly, about 1/100th of an inch in diameter. It is commonly
found gliding on the mud or weeds in ponds, where it engulfs its
microscopic food by means of out-flowing lobes (PS). The food vacuole
(FV) contains ingested food. From the contractile vacuole (CV) the waste
matter is discharged. N is the nucleus, GR, granules.]

From ancient times it has been a favourite answer that the dust of the
earth may have become living in a way which is outside scientific
description. This answer forecloses the question, and it is far too soon
to do that. Science must often say "Ignoramus": Science should be slow
to say "Ignorabimus."

A second position held by Helmholtz, Lord Kelvin, and others, suggests
that minute living creatures may have come to the earth from elsewhere,
in the cracks of a meteorite or among cosmic dust. It must be remembered
that seeds can survive prolonged exposure to very low temperatures; that
spores of bacteria can survive high temperature; that seeds of plants
and germs of animals in a state of "latent life" can survive prolonged
drought and absence of oxygen. It is possible, according to Berthelot,
that as long as there is not molecular disintegration vital activities
may be suspended for a time, and may afterwards recommence when
appropriate conditions are restored. Therefore, one should be slow to
say that a long journey through space is impossible. The obvious
limitation of Lord Kelvin's theory is that it only shifts the problem of
the origin of organisms (i.e. living creatures) from the earth to
elsewhere.

The third answer is that living creatures of a very simple sort may have
emerged on the earth's surface from not-living material, e.g. from some
semi-fluid carbon compounds activated by ferments. The tenability of
this view is suggested by the achievements of the synthetic chemists,
who are able artificially to build up substances such as oxalic acid,
indigo, salicylic acid, caffeine, and grape-sugar. We do not know,
indeed, what in Nature's laboratory would take the place of the clever
synthetic chemist, but there seems to be a tendency to complexity.
Corpuscles form atoms, atoms form molecules, small molecules large
ones.

Various concrete suggestions have been made in regard to the possible
origin of living matter, which will be dealt with in a later chapter. So
far as we know of what goes on to-day, there is no evidence of
spontaneous generation; organisms seem always to arise from pre-existing
organisms of the same kind; where any suggestion of the contrary has
been fancied, there have been flaws in the experimenting. But it is one
thing to accept the verdict "omne vivum e vivo" as a fact to which
experiment has not yet discovered an exception and another thing to
maintain that this must always have been true or must always remain
true.

If the synthetic chemists should go on surpassing themselves, if
substances like white of egg should be made artificially, and if we
should get more light on possible steps by which simple living creatures
may have arisen from not-living materials, this would not greatly affect
our general outlook on life, though it would increase our appreciation
of what is often libelled as "inert" matter. If the dust of the earth
did naturally give rise very long ago to living creatures, if they are
in a real sense born of her and of the sunshine, then the whole world
becomes more continuous and more vital, and all the inorganic groaning
and travailing becomes more intelligible.


§ 4

The First Organisms upon the Earth

We cannot have more than a speculative picture of the first living
creatures upon the earth or, rather, in the waters that covered the
earth. A basis for speculation is to be found, however, in the simplest
creatures living to-day, such as some of the bacteria and one-celled
animalcules, especially those called Protists, which have not taken any
very definite step towards becoming either plants or animals. No one can
be sure, but there is much to be said for the theory that the first
creatures were microscopic globules of living matter, not unlike the
simplest bacteria of to-day, but able to live on air, water, and
dissolved salts. From such a source may have originated a race of
one-celled marine organisms which were able to manufacture chlorophyll,
or something like chlorophyll, that is to say, the green pigment which
makes it possible for plants to utilise the energy of the sunlight in
breaking up carbon dioxide and in building up (photosynthesis) carbon
compounds like sugars and starch. These little units were probably
encased in a cell-wall of cellulose, but their boxed-in energy expressed
itself in the undulatory movement of a lash or flagellum, by means of
which they propelled themselves energetically through the water. There
are many similar organisms to-day, mostly in water, but some of
them--simple one-celled plants--paint the tree-stems and even the
paving-stones green in wet weather. According to Prof. A. H. Church
there was a long chapter in the history of the earth when the sea that
covered everything teemed with these green flagellates--the originators
of the Vegetable Kingdom.

On another tack, however, there probably evolved a series of simple
predatory creatures, not able to build up organic matter from air,
water, and salts, but devouring their neighbours. These units were not
closed in with cellulose, but remained naked, with their living matter
or protoplasm flowing out in changeful processes, such as we see in the
Amoebæ in the ditch or in our own white blood corpuscles and other
amoeboid cells. These were the originators of the animal kingdom. Thus
from very simple Protists the first animals and the first plants may
have arisen. All were still very minute, and it is worth remembering
that had there been any scientific spectator after our kind upon the
earth during these long ages, he would have lamented the entire absence
of life, although the seas were teeming. The simplest forms of life and
the protoplasm which Huxley called the physical basis of life will be
dealt with in the chapter on Biology in a later section of this work.


FIRST GREAT STEPS IN EVOLUTION

THE FIRST PLANTS--THE FIRST ANIMALS--BEGINNINGS OF BODIES--EVOLUTION OF
SEX--BEGINNING OF NATURAL DEATH

§ 1

The Contrast between Plants and Animals

However it may have come about, there is no doubt at all that one of the
first great steps in Organic Evolution was the forking of the
genealogical tree into Plants and Animals--the most important parting of
the ways in the whole history of Nature.

Typical plants have chlorophyll; they are able to feed at a low chemical
level on air, water, and salts, using the energy of the sunlight in
their photosynthesis. They have their cells boxed in by cellulose walls,
so that their opportunities for motility are greatly restricted. They
manufacture much more nutritive material than they need, and live far
below their income. They have no ready way of getting rid of any
nitrogenous waste matter that they may form, and this probably helps to
keep them sluggish.

Animals, on the other hand, feed at a high chemical level, on the
carbohydrates (e.g. starch and sugar), fats, and proteins (e.g. gluten,
albumin, casein) which are manufactured by other animals, or to begin
with, by plants. Their cells have not cellulose walls, nor in most cases
much wall of any kind, and motility in the majority is unrestricted.
Animals live much more nearly up to their income. If we could make for
an animal and a plant of equal weight two fractions showing the ratio of
the upbuilding, constructive, chemical processes to the down-breaking,
disruptive, chemical processes that go on in their respective bodies,
the ratio for the plant would be much greater than the corresponding
ratio for the animal. In other words, animals take the munitions which
plants laboriously manufacture and explode them in locomotion and
work; and the entire system of animate nature depends upon the
photosynthesis that goes on in green plants.

[Illustration: _From the Smithsonian Report, 1917_

A PIECE OF A REEF-BUILDING CORAL, BUILT UP BY A LARGE COLONY OF SMALL
SEA-ANEMONE-LIKE POLYPS, EACH OF WHICH FORMS FROM THE SALTS OF THE SEA A
SKELETON OR SHELL OF LIME

The wonderful mass of corals, which are very beautiful, are the skeleton
remains of hundreds of these little creatures.]

[Illustration: _Photo: J. J. Ward, F.E.S._

THE INSET CIRCLE SHOWS A GROUP OF CHALK-FORMING ANIMALS, OR
FORAMINIFERA, EACH ABOUT THE SIZE OF A VERY SMALL PIN'S HEAD

They form a great part of the chalk cliffs of Dover and similar deposits
which have been raised from the floor of an ancient sea.

THE ENORMOUSLY ENLARGED ILLUSTRATION IS THAT OF A COMMON FORAMINIFER
(POLYSTOMELLA) SHOWING THE SHELL IN THE CENTRE AND THE OUTFLOWING
NETWORK OF LIVING MATTER, ALONG WHICH GRANULES ARE CONTINUALLY
TRAVELLING, AND BY WHICH FOOD PARTICLES ARE ENTANGLED AND DRAWN IN

_Reproduced by permission of the Natural History Museum_ (_after Max
Schultze_).]

As the result of much more explosive life, animals have to deal with
much in the way of nitrogenous waste products, the ashes of the living
fire, but these are usually got rid of very effectively, e.g. in the
kidney filters, and do not clog the system by being deposited as
crystals and the like, as happens in plants. Sluggish animals like
sea-squirts which have no kidneys are exceptions that prove the rule,
and it need hardly be said that the statements that have been made in
regard to the contrasts between plants and animals are general
statements. There is often a good deal of the plant about the animal, as
in sedentary sponges, zoophytes, corals, and sea-squirts, and there is
often a little of the animal about the plant, as we see in the movements
of all shoots and roots and leaves, and occasionally in the parts of the
flower. But the important fact is that on the early forking of the
genealogical tree, i.e. the divergence of plants and animals, there
depended and depends all the higher life of the animal kingdom, not to
speak of mankind. The continuance of civilisation, the upkeep of the
human and animal population of the globe, and even the supply of oxygen
to the air we breathe, depend on the silent laboratories of the green
leaves, which are able with the help of the sunlight to use carbonic
acid, water, and salts to build up the bread of life.


§ 2

The Beginnings of Land Plants

It is highly probable that for long ages the waters covered the earth,
and that all the primeval vegetation consisted of simple Flagellates in
the universal Open Sea. But contraction of the earth's crust brought
about elevations and depressions of the sea-floor, and in places the
solid substratum was brought near enough the surface to allow the
floating plants to begin to settle down without getting out of the
light. This is how Professor Church pictures the beginning of a fixed
vegetation--a very momentous step in evolution. It was perhaps among
this early vegetation that animals had their first successes. As the
floor of the sea in these shallow areas was raised higher and higher
there was a beginning of dry land. The sedentary plants already spoken
of were the ancestors of the shore seaweeds, and there is no doubt that
when we go down at the lowest tide and wade cautiously out among the
jungle of vegetation only exposed on such occasions we are getting a
glimpse of very ancient days. _This_ is the forest primeval.


The Protozoa

Animals below the level of zoophytes and sponges are called Protozoa.
The word obviously means "First Animals," but all that we can say is
that the very simplest of them may give us some hint of the simplicity
of the original first animals. For it is quite certain that the vast
majority of the Protozoa to-day are far too complicated to be thought of
as primitive. Though most of them are microscopic, each is an animal
complete in itself, with the same fundamental bodily attributes as are
manifested in ourselves. They differ from animals of higher degree in
not being built up of the unit areas or corpuscles called cells. They
have no cells, no tissues, no organs, in the ordinary acceptation of
these words, but many of them show a great complexity of internal
structure, far exceeding that of the ordinary cells that build up the
tissues of higher animals. They are complete living creatures which have
not gone in for body-making.

In the dim and distant past there was a time when the only animals were
of the nature of Protozoa, and it is safe to say that one of the great
steps in evolution was the establishment of three great types of
Protozoa: (_a_) Some were very active, the Infusorians, like the slipper
animalcule, the night-light (Noctiluca), which makes the seas
phosphorescent at night, and the deadly Trypanosome, which causes
Sleeping Sickness. (_b_) Others were very sluggish, the parasitic
Sporozoa, like the malaria organism which the mosquito introduces into
man's body. (_c_) Others were neither very active nor very passive, the
Rhizopods, with out-flowing processes of living matter. This amoeboid
line of evolution has been very successful; it is represented by the
Rhizopods, such as Amoebæ and the chalk-forming Foraminifera and the
exquisitely beautiful flint-shelled Radiolarians of the open sea. They
have their counterparts in the amoeboid cells of most multicellular
animals, such as the phagocytes which migrate about in the body,
engulfing and digesting intruding bacteria, serving as sappers and
miners when something has to be broken down and built up again, and
performing other useful offices.


§ 3

The Making of a Body

The great naturalist Louis Agassiz once said that the biggest gulf in
Organic Nature was that between the unicellular and the multicellular
animals (Protozoa and Metazoa). But the gulf was bridged very long ago
when sponges, stinging animals, and simple worms were evolved, and
showed, for the first time, a "body." What would one not give to be able
to account for the making of a body, one of the great steps in
evolution! No one knows, but the problem is not altogether obscure.

When an ordinary Protozoon or one-celled animal divides into two or
more, which is its way of multiplying, the daughter-units thus formed
float apart and live independent lives. But there are a few Protozoa in
which the daughter-units are not quite separated off from one another,
but remain coherent. Thus Volvox, a beautiful green ball, found in some
canals and the like, is a colony of a thousand or even ten thousand
cells. It has almost formed a body! But in this "colony-making"
Protozoon, and in others like it, the component cells are all of one
kind, whereas in true multicellular animals there are different kinds
of cells, showing division of labour. There are some other Protozoa in
which the nucleus or kernel divides into many nuclei within the cell.
This is seen in the Giant Amoeba (Pelomyxa), sometimes found in
duck-ponds, or the beautiful Opalina, which always lives in the hind
part of the frog's food-canal. If a portion of the living matter of
these Protozoa should gather round each of the nuclei, then _that would
be the beginning of a body_. It would be still nearer the beginning of a
body if division of labour set in, and if there was a setting apart of
egg-cells and sperm-cells distinct from body-cells.

It was possibly in some such way that animals and plants with a body
were first evolved. Two points should be noticed, that body-making is
not essentially a matter of size, though it made large size possible.
For the body of a many-celled Wheel Animalcule or Rotifer is no bigger
than many a Protozoon. Yet the Rotifer--we are thinking of Hydatina--has
nine hundred odd cells, whereas the Protozoon has only one, except in
forms like Volvox. Secondly, it is a luminous fact that _every
many-celled animal from sponge to man that multiplies in the ordinary
way begins at the beginning again as a "single cell,"_ the fertilised
egg-cell. It is, of course, not an ordinary single cell that develops
into an earthworm or a butterfly, an eagle, or a man; it is a cell in
which a rich inheritance, the fruition of ages, is somehow condensed;
but it is interesting to bear in mind the elementary fact that every
many-celled creature, reproduced in the ordinary way and not by budding
or the like, starts as a fertilised egg-cell. The coherence of the
daughter-cells into which the fertilised egg-cell divides is a
reminiscence, as it were, of the primeval coherence of daughter-units
that made the first body possible.


The Beginning of Sexual Reproduction

A freshwater Hydra, growing on the duckweed usually multiplies by
budding. It forms daughter-buds, living images of itself; a check comes
to nutrition and these daughter-buds go free. A big sea-anemone may
divide in two or more parts, which become separate animals. This is
asexual reproduction, which means that the multiplication takes place by
dividing into two or many portions, and not by liberating egg-cells and
sperm-cells. Among animals as among plants, asexual reproduction is very
common. But it has great disadvantages, for it is apt to be
physiologically expensive, and it is beset with difficulties when the
body shows great division of labour, and is very intimately bound into
unity. Thus, no one can think of a bee or a bird multiplying by division
or by budding. Moreover, if the body of the parent has suffered from
injury or deterioration, the result of this is bound to be handed on to
the next generation if asexual reproduction is the only method.

[Illustration: _Photos: J. J. Ward, F.E.S._

A PLANT-LIKE ANIMAL, OR ZOOPHYTE, CALLED OBELIA

Consisting of a colony of small polyps, whose stinging tentacles are
well shown greatly enlarged in the lower photograph.]

[Illustration: _Reproduced by permission of "The Quart. Journ. Mic.
Sci."_

TRYPANOSOMA GAMBIENSE

(Very highly magnified.)

The microscopic animal Trypanosome, which causes Sleeping Sickness. The
study of these organisms has of late years acquired an immense
importance on account of the widespread and dangerous maladies to which
some of them give rise. It lives in the blood of man, who is infected by
the bite of a Tse-tse fly which carries the parasite from some other
host.]

[Illustration: VOLVOX

The Volvox is found in some canals and the like. It is one of the first
animals to suggest the beginning of a body. It is a colony of a thousand
or even ten thousand cells, but they are all cells of one kind. In
_multicellular_ animals the cells are of _different_ kinds with
different functions. Each of the ordinary cells (marked 5) has two
lashes or flagella. Daughter colonies inside the Parent colony are being
formed at 3, 4, and 2. The development of germ-cells is shown at 1.]

[Illustration: PROTEROSPONGIA

One of the simplest multicellular animals, illustrating the beginning of
a body. There is a setting apart of egg-cells and sperm-cells, distinct
from body-cells; the collared lashed cells on the margin are different
in kind from those farther in. Thus, as in indubitable multicellular
animals, division of labour has begun.]

Splitting into two or many parts was the old-fashioned way of
multiplying, but one of the great steps in evolution was the discovery
of a better method, namely, sexual reproduction. The gist of this is
simply that during the process of body-building (by the development of
the fertilised egg-cell) certain units, _the germ-cells_, do not share
in forming ordinary tissues or organs, but remain apart, continuing the
full inheritance which was condensed in the fertilised egg-cell. _These
cells kept by themselves are the originators of the future reproductive
cells of the mature animal_; they give rise to the egg-cells and the
sperm-cells.

The advantages of this method are great. (1) The new generation is
started less expensively, for it is easier to shed germ-cells into the
cradle of the water than to separate off half of the body. (2) It is
possible to start a great many new lives at once, and this may be of
vital importance when the struggle for existence is very keen, and when
parental care is impossible. (3) The germ-cells are little likely to be
prejudicially affected by disadvantageous dints impressed on the body of
the parent--little likely unless the dints have peculiarly penetrating
consequences, as in the case of poisons. (4) A further advantage is
implied in the formation of two kinds of germ-cells--the ovum or
egg-cell, with a considerable amount of building material and often with
a legacy of nutritive yolk; the spermatozoon or sperm-cell, adapted to
move in fluids and to find the ovum from a distance, thus securing
change-provoking cross-fertilisation.


§ 4

The Evolution of Sex

Another of the great steps in organic evolution was the differentiation
of two different physiological types, the male or sperm-producer and the
female or egg-producer. It seems to be a deep-seated difference in
constitution, which leads one egg to develop into a male, and another,
lying beside it in the nest, into a female. In the case of pigeons it
seems almost certain, from the work of Professor Oscar Riddle, that
there are two kinds of egg, a male-producing egg and a female-producing
egg, which differ in their yolk-forming and other physiological
characters.

In sea-urchins we often find two creatures superficially
indistinguishable, but the one is a female with large ovaries and the
other is a male with equally large testes. Here the physiological
difference does not affect the body as a whole, but the reproductive
organs or gonads only, though more intimate physiology would doubtless
discover differences in the blood or in the chemical routine
(metabolism). In a large number of cases, however, there are marked
superficial differences between the sexes, and everyone is familiar with
such contrasts as peacock and peahen, stag and hind. In such cases the
physiological difference between the sperm-producer and the
ovum-producer, for this is the essential difference, saturates through
the body and expresses itself in masculine and feminine structures and
modes of behaviour. The expression of the masculine and feminine
characters is in some cases under the control of hormones or chemical
messengers which are carried by the blood from the reproductive organs
throughout the body, and pull the trigger which brings about the
development of an antler or a wattle or a decorative plume or a capacity
for vocal and saltatory display. In some cases it is certain that the
female carries in a latent state the masculine features, but these are
kept from expressing themselves by other chemical messengers from the
ovary. Of these chemical messengers more must be said later on.

Recent research has shown that while the difference between male and
female is very deep-rooted, corresponding to a difference in gearing, it
is not always clear-cut. Thus a hen-pigeon may be very masculine, and a
cock-pigeon very feminine. The difference is in degree, not in kind.


§ 5

What is the meaning of the universal or almost universal inevitableness
of death? A Sequoia or "Big Tree" of California has been known to live
for over two thousand years, but eventually it died. A centenarian
tortoise has been known, and a sea-anemone sixty years of age; but
eventually they die. What is the meaning of this apparently inevitable
stoppage of bodily life?


The Beginning of Natural Death

There are three chief kinds of death, (_a_) The great majority of
animals come to a violent end, being devoured by others or killed by
sudden and extreme changes in their surroundings. (_b_) When an animal
enters a new habitat, or comes into new associations with other
organisms, it may be invaded by a microbe or by some larger parasite to
which it is unaccustomed and to which it can offer no resistance. With
many parasites a "live-and-let-live" compromise is arrived at, but new
parasites are apt to be fatal, as man knows to his cost when he is
bitten by a tse-tse fly which infects him with the microscopic animal (a
Trypanosome) that causes Sleeping Sickness. In many animals the
parasites are not troublesome as long as the host is vigorous, but if
the host is out of condition the parasites may get the upper hand, as in
the so-called "grouse disease," and become fatal. (_c_) But besides
violent death and microbic (or parasitic) death, there is natural death.
This is in great part to be regarded as the price paid for a body. A
body worth having implies complexity or division of labour, and this
implies certain internal furnishings of a more or less stable kind in
which the effects of wear and tear are apt to accumulate. It is not the
living matter itself that grows old so much as the framework in which it
works--the furnishings of the vital laboratory. There are various
processes of rejuvenescence, e.g. rest, repair, change, reorganisation,
which work against the inevitable processes of senescence, but sooner or
later the victory is with ageing. Another deep reason for natural death
is to be found in the physiological expensiveness of reproduction, for
many animals, from worms to eels, illustrate natural death as the
nemesis of starting new lives. Now it is a very striking fact that to a
large degree the simplest animals or Protozoa are exempt from natural
death. They are so relatively simple that they can continually
recuperate by rest and repair; they do not accumulate any bad debts.
Moreover, their modes of multiplying, by dividing into two or many
units, are very inexpensive physiologically. It seems that in some
measure this bodily immortality of the Protozoa is shared by some simple
many-celled animals like the freshwater Hydra and Planarian worms. Here
is an interesting chapter in evolution, the evolution of means of
evading or staving off natural death. Thus there is the well-known case
of the Paloloworm of the coral-reefs where the body breaks up in
liberating the germ-cells, but the head-end remains fixed in a crevice
of the coral, and buds out a new body at leisure.

Along with the evolution of the ways of avoiding death should be
considered also the gradual establishment of the length of life best
suited to the welfare of the species, and the punctuation of the
life-history to suit various conditions.

[Illustration: _Photo: J. J. Ward, F.E.S._

GREEN HYDRA

A little freshwater polyp, about half an inch long, with a crown of
tentacles round the mouth. It is seen giving off a bud, a clear
illustration of asexual reproduction. When a tentacle touches some small
organism the latter is paralysed and drawn into the mouth.]

[Illustration: _Photo: J. J. Ward, F.E.S._

EARTHWORM

Earthworms began the profitable habit of moving with one end of the body
always in front, and from worms to man the great majority of animals
have bilateral symmetry.]

[Illustration: DIAGRAM ILLUSTRATING THE BEGINNING OF INDIVIDUAL LIFE

1. An immature _sperm_-cell, with 4 chromosomes (nuclear bodies)
represented as rods.

2. A mature sperm-cell, with 2 chromosomes.

3. An immature _egg_-cell, with 4 chromosomes represented as curved
bodies.

4. A mature egg-cell, with 2 chromosomes.

5. The spermatozoon fertilises the ovum, introducing 2 chromosomes.

6. The fertilised ovum, with 4 chromosomes, 2 of paternal origin and 2
of maternal origin.

7. The chromosomes lie at the equator, and each is split longitudinally.
The centrosome introduced by the spermatozoon has divided into two
centrosomes, one at each pole of the nucleus. These play an important
part in the division or segmentation of the egg.

8. The fertilised egg has divided into two cells. Each cell has 2
paternal and 2 maternal chromosomes.]

[Illustration: _Reproduced from the Smithsonian Report, 1917._

GLASS MODEL OF A SEA-ANEMONE

A long tubular sea-anemone, with a fine crown of tentacles around the
mouth. The suggestion of a flower is very obvious. By means of stinging
lassoes on the tentacles minute animals on which it feeds are paralysed
and captured for food.]

[Illustration: THIS DRAWING SHOWS THE EVOLUTION OF THE BRAIN FROM FISH
TO MAN

The Cerebrum, the seat of intelligence, increases in proportion to the
other parts. In mammals it becomes more and more convoluted. The brain,
which lies in one plane in fishes, becomes gradually curved on itself.
In birds it is more curved than the drawing shows.]


§ 6

Great Acquisitions

In animals like sea-anemones and jellyfishes the general symmetry of the
body is radial; that is to say, there is no right or left, and the body
might be halved along many planes. It is a kind of symmetry well suited
for sedentary or for drifting life. But worms began the profitable habit
of moving with one end of the body always in front, and from worms to
man the great majority of animals have bilateral symmetry. They have a
right and a left side, and there is only one cut that halves the body.
This kind of symmetry is suited for a more strenuous life than radial
animals show; it is suited for pursuing food, for avoiding enemies, for
chasing mates. And _with the establishment of bilateral symmetry must be
associated the establishment of head-brains_, the beginning of which is
to be found in some simple worm-types.

Among the other great acquisitions gradually evolved we may notice: a
well-developed head with sense-organs, the establishment of large
internal surfaces such as the digestive and absorptive wall of the
food-canal, the origin of quickly contracting striped muscle and of
muscular appendages, the formation of blood as a distributing medium
throughout the body, from which all the parts take what they need and to
which they also contribute.

Another very important acquisition, almost confined (so far as is known)
to backboned animals, was the evolution of what are called glands of
internal secretion, such as the thyroid and the supra-renal. These
manufacture subtle chemical substances which are distributed by the
blood throughout the body, and have a manifold influence in regulating
and harmonising the vital processes. Some of these chemical messengers
are called hormones, which stimulate organs and tissues to greater
activity; others are called chalones, which put on a brake. Some
regulate growth and others rapidly alter the pressure and composition
of the blood. Some of them call into active development certain parts of
the body which have been, as it were, waiting for an appropriate
trigger-pulling. Thus, at the proper time, the milk-glands of a
mammalian mother are awakened from their dormancy. This very interesting
outcome of evolution will be dealt with in another portion of this work.


THE INCLINED PLANE OF ANIMAL BEHAVIOUR

§ 1

Before passing to a connected story of the gradual emergence of higher
and higher forms of life in the course of the successive ages--the
procession of life, as it may be called--it will be useful to consider
the evolution of animal behaviour.


Evolution of Mind

A human being begins as a microscopic fertilised egg-cell, within which
there is condensed the long result of time--Man's inheritance. The long
period of nine months before birth, with its intimate partnership
between mother and offspring, is passed as it were in sleep, and no one
can make any statement in regard to the mind of the unborn child. Even
after birth the dawn of mind is as slow as it is wonderful. To begin
with, there is in the ovum and early embryo no nervous system at all,
and it develops very gradually from simple beginnings. Yet as mentality
cannot come in from outside, we seem bound to conclude that the
potentiality of it--whatever that means--resides in the individual from
the very first. The particular kind of activity known to us as thinking,
feeling, and willing is the most intimate part of our experience, known
to us directly apart from our senses, and the possibility of that must
be implicit in the germ-cell just as the genius of Newton was implicit
in a very miserable specimen of an infant. Now what is true of the
individual is true also of the race--there is a gradual evolution of
that aspect of the living creature's activity which we call mind. We
cannot put our finger on any point and say: Before this stage there was
no mind. Indeed, many facts suggest the conclusion that wherever there
is life there is some degree of mind--even in the plants. Or it might be
more accurate to put the conclusion in another way, that the activity we
call life has always in some degree an inner or mental aspect.

[Illustration: OKAPI AND GIRAFFE

The Okapi is one of the great zoölogical discoveries. It gives a good
idea of what the Giraffe's ancestors were like. The Okapi was unknown
until discovered in 1900 by Sir Harry Johnston in Central Africa, where
these strange animals have probably lived in dense forests from time
immemorial.]

In another part of this book there is an account of the dawn of mind in
backboned animals; what we aim at here is an outline of what may be
called the inclined plane of animal behaviour.

A very simple animal accumulates a little store of potential energy, and
it proceeds to expend this, like an explosive, by acting on its
environment. It does so in a very characteristic self-preservative
fashion, so that it burns without being consumed and explodes without
being blown to bits. It is characteristic of the organism that it
remains a going concern for a longer or shorter period--its length of
life. Living creatures that expended their energy ineffectively or
self-destructively would be eliminated in the struggle for existence.
When a simple one-celled organism explores a corner of the field seen
under a microscope, behaving to all appearance very like a dog scouring
a field seen through a telescope, it seems permissible to think of
something corresponding to mental endeavour associated with its
activity. This impression is strengthened when an amoeba pursues
another amoeba, overtakes it, engulfs it, loses it, pursues it again,
recaptures it, and so on. What is quite certain is that the behaviour of
the animalcule is not like that of a potassium pill fizzing about in a
basin of water, nor like the lurching movements of a gun that has got
loose and "taken charge" on board ship. Another feature is that the
locomotor activity of an animalcule often shows a distinct
individuality: it may swim, for instance, in a loose spiral.

But there is another side to vital activity besides acting upon the
surrounding world; the living creature is acted on by influences from
without. The organism acts on its environment; that is the one side of
the shield: the environment acts upon the organism; that is the other
side. If we are to see life whole we must recognise these two sides of
what we call living, and it is missing an important part of the history
of animal life if we fail to see that evolution implies becoming more
advantageously sensitive to the environment, making more of its
influences, shutting out profitless stimuli, and opening more gateways
to knowledge. The bird's world is a larger and finer world than an
earthworm's; the world means more to the bird than to the worm.


The Trial and Error Method

Simple creatures act with a certain degree of spontaneity on their
environment, and they likewise react effectively to surrounding stimuli.
Animals come to have definite "answers back," sometimes several,
sometimes only one, as in the case of the Slipper Animalcule, which
reverses its cilia when it comes within the sphere of some disturbing
influence, retreats, and, turning upon itself tentatively, sets off
again in the same general direction as before, but at an angle to the
previous line. If it misses the disturbing influence, well and good; if
it strikes it again, the tactics are repeated until a satisfactory way
out is discovered or the stimulation proves fatal.

It may be said that the Slipper Animalcule has but one answer to every
question, but there are many Protozoa which have several enregistered
reactions. When there are alternative reactions which are tried one
after another, the animal is pursuing what is called the trial-and-error
method, and a higher note is struck.

There is an endeavour after satisfaction, and a trial of answers. When
the creature profits by experience to the extent of giving the right
answer first, there is the beginning of learning.

[Illustration: DIAGRAM OF A SIMPLE REFLEX ARC IN A BACKBONELESS ANIMAL
LIKE AN EARTHWORM

1. A sensory nerve-cell (S.C.) on the surface receives a stimulus.

2. The stimulus travels along the sensatory nerve-fibre (S.F.)

3. The sensory nerve-fibre branches in the nerve-cord.

4. Its branches come into close contact (SY^{1}) with those of an
associative or communicating nerve-cell (A.C.).

5. Other branches of the associative cell come into close contact
(SY^{2}) with the branches or dendrites of a motor nerve-cell (M.C.).

6. An impulse or command travels along the motor nerve-fibre or axis
cylinder of the motor nerve-cell.

7. The motor nerve-fibre ends on a muscle-fibre (M.F.) near the surface.
This moves and the reflex action is complete.]

[Illustration: _Photo: British Museum_ (_Natural History_).

THE YUCCA MOTH

The Yucca Moth, emerging from her cocoon, flies at night to a Yucca
flower and collects pollen from the stamens, holding a little ball of it
in her mouth-parts. She then visits another flower and lays an egg in
the seed-box. After this she applies the pollen to the tip of the
pistil, thus securing the fertilisation of the flower and the growth of
the ovules in the pod. Yucca flowers in Britain do not produce seeds
because there are no Yucca Moths.]

[Illustration: INCLINED PLANE OF ANIMAL BEHAVIOUR

Diagram illustrating animal behaviour. The main line represents the
general life of the creature. On the upper side are activities implying
initiative; on the lower side actions which are almost automatic.

_Upper Side._--I. Energetic actions. II. Simple tentatives. III.
Trial-and-error methods. IV. Non-intelligent experiments. V.
Experiential "learning." VI. Associative "learning." VII. Intelligent
behaviour. VIII. Rational conduct (man).

_Lower Side._--1. Reactions to environment. 2. Enregistered reactions.
3. Simple reflex actions. 4. Compound reflex actions. 5. Tropisms. 6.
Enregistered rhythms. 7. Simple instincts. 8. Chain instincts. 9.
Instinctive activities influenced by intelligence. 10. Subconscious
cerebration at a high level (man).]

[Illustration: _Photo: J. J. Ward, F.E.S._

VENUS' FLY-TRAP

One of the most remarkable plants in the world, which captures its prey
by means of a trap formed from part of its leaf. It has been induced to
snap at and hold a bristle. If an insect lighting on the leaf touches
one of six very sensitive hairs, which pull the trigger of the movement,
the two halves of the leaf close rapidly and the fringing teeth on the
margin interlock, preventing the insect's escape. Then follows an
exudation of digestive juice.]

[Illustration: _Reproduced by permission from "The Wonders of Instinct"
by J. H. Fabre._

A SPIDER SUNNING HER EGGS

A kind of spider, called Lycosa, lying head downwards at the edge of her
nest, and holding her silken cocoon--the bag containing the eggs--up
towards the sun in her hindmost pair of legs. This extraordinary
proceeding is believed to assist in the hatching.]


Reflex Actions

Among simple multicellular animals, such as sea-anemones, we find the
beginnings of reflex actions, and a considerable part of the behaviour
of the lower animals is reflex. That is to say, there are laid down in
the animal in the course of its development certain pre-arrangements of
nerve-cells and muscle-cells which secure that a fit and proper answer
is given to a frequently recurrent stimulus. An earthworm half out of
its burrow becomes aware of the light tread of a thrush's foot, and
jerks itself back into its hole before anyone can say "reflex action."
What is it that happens?

Certain sensory nerve-cells in the earthworm's skin are stimulated by
vibrations in the earth; the message travels down a sensory nerve-fibre
from each of the stimulated cells and enters the nerve-cord. The sensory
fibres come into vital connection with branches of intermediary,
associative, or communicating cells, which are likewise connected with
motor nerve-cells. To these the message is thus shunted. From the motor
nerve-cells an impulse or command travels by motor nerve-fibres, one
from each cell, to the muscles, which contract. If this took as long to
happen as it takes to describe, even in outline, it would not be of much
use to the earthworm. But the motor answer follows the sensory stimulus
almost instantaneously. The great advantage of establishing or
enregistering these reflex chains is that the answers are practically
ready-made or inborn, not requiring to be learned. It is not necessary
that the brain should be stimulated if there is a brain; nor does the
animal will to act, though in certain cases it may by means of higher
controlling nerve-centres keep the natural reflex response from being
given, as happens, for instance, when we control a cough or a sneeze on
some solemn occasion. The evolutionary method, if we may use the
expression, has been to enregister ready-made responses; and as we
ascend the animal kingdom, we find reflex actions becoming complicated
and often linked together, so that the occurrence of one pulls the
trigger of another, and so on in a chain. The behaviour of the
insectivorous plant called Venus's fly-trap when it shuts on an insect
is like a reflex action in an animal, but plants have no definite
nervous system.


What are Called Tropisms

A somewhat higher level on the inclined plane is illustrated by what are
called "tropisms," obligatory movements which the animal makes,
adjusting its whole body so that physiological equilibrium results in
relation to gravity, pressure, currents, moisture, heat, light,
electricity, and surfaces of contact. A moth is flying past a candle;
the eye next the light is more illumined than the other; a physiological
inequilibrium results, affecting nerve-cells and muscle-cells; the
outcome is that the moth automatically adjusts its flight so that both
eyes become equally illumined; in doing this it often flies into the
candle.

It may seem bad business that the moth should fly into the candle, but
the flame is an utterly artificial item in its environment to which no
one can expect it to be adapted. These tropisms play an important rôle
in animal behaviour.

