§ 4

The Reptilian Mind

We speak of the wisdom of the serpent; but it is not very easy to
justify the phrase. Among all the multitude of reptiles--snakes,
lizards, turtles, and crocodiles, a motley crowd--we cannot see much
more than occasional traces of intelligence. The inner life remains a
tiny rill.

No doubt many reptiles are very effective; but it is an instinctive
rather than an intelligent efficiency. The well-known "soft-shell"
tortoise of the United States swims with powerful strokes and runs so
quickly that it can hardly be overtaken. It hunts vigorously for
crayfish and insect larvæ in the rivers. It buries itself in the mud
when cold weather comes. It may lie on a floating log ready to slip into
the water at a moment's notice; it may bask on a sunny bank or in the
warm shallows. Great wariness is shown in choosing times and places for
egg-laying. The mother tramps the earth down upon the buried eggs. All
is effective. Similar statements might be made in regard to scores of
other reptiles; but what we see is almost wholly of the nature of
instinctive routine, and we get little glimpse of more than efficiency
and endeavour.

In a few cases there is proof of reptiles finding their way back to
their homes from a considerable distance, and recognition of persons is
indubitable. Gilbert White remarks of his tortoise: "Whenever the good
old lady came in sight who had waited on it for more than thirty years,
it always hobbled with awkward alacrity towards its benefactress, while
to strangers it was altogether inattentive." Of definite learning there
are a few records. Thus Professor Yerkes studied a sluggish turtle of
retiring disposition, taking advantage of its strong desire to efface
itself. On the path of the darkened nest of damp grass he interposed a
simple maze in the form of a partitioned box. After wandering about
constantly for thirty-five minutes the turtle found its way through the
maze by chance. Two hours afterwards it reached the nest in fifteen
minutes; and after another interval of two hours it only required five
minutes. After the third trial, the routes became more direct, there was
less aimless wandering. The time of the twentieth trial was forty-five
seconds; that of the thirtieth, forty seconds. In the thirtieth case,
the path followed was quite direct, and so it was on the fiftieth trip,
which only required thirty-five seconds. Of course, the whole thing did
not amount to very much; but there was a definite learning, _a learning
from experience_, which has played an important part in the evolution of
animal behaviour.

Comparing reptiles with amphibians, we may recognise an increased
masterliness of behaviour and a hint of greater plasticity. The records
of observers who have made pets of reptiles suggest that the life of
feeling or emotion is growing stronger, and so do stories, if they can
be accepted, which suggest the beginning of conjugal affection.

The error must be guarded against of interpreting in terms of
intelligence what is merely the outcome of long-continued structure
adaptation. When the limbless lizard called the Slow-worm is suddenly
seized by the tail, it escapes by surrendering the appendage, which
breaks across a preformed weak plane. But this is a reflex action, not a
reflective one. It is comparable to our sudden withdrawal of our finger
from a very hot cinder. The Egg-eating African snake Dasypeltis gets the
egg of a bird into its gullet unbroken, and cuts the shell against
downward-projecting sharp points of the vertebræ. None of the precious
contents is lost and the broken "empties" are returned. It is admirable,
indeed unsurpassable; but it is not intelligent.


§ 5

Mind in Birds

Sight and hearing are highly developed in birds, and the senses, besides
pulling the triggers of inborn efficiencies, supply the raw materials
for intelligence. There is some truth, though not the whole truth, in
the old philosophical dictum, that there is nothing in the intellect
which was not previously in the senses. Many people have admired the
certainty and alacrity with which gulls pick up a fragment of biscuit
from the white wake of a steamer, and the incident is characteristic. In
their power of rapidly altering the focus of the eye, birds are
unsurpassed.

To the sense of sight in birds, the sense of hearing comes a good
second. A twig breaks under our feet, and out sounds the danger-call of
the bird we were trying to watch. Many young birds, like partridges,
respond when two or three hours old to the anxious warning note of the
parents, and squat motionless on the ground, though other sounds, such
as the excited clucking of a foster-mother hen, leave them indifferent.
They do not know what they are doing when they squat; they are obeying
the living hand of the past which is within them. Their behaviour is
instinctive. But the present point is the discriminating quality of the
sense of hearing; and that is corroborated by the singing of birds.
It is emotional art, expressing feelings in the medium of sound. On the
part of the females, who are supposed to listen, it betokens a
cultivated ear.

[Illustration: THE BEAVER

The beaver will gnaw through trees a foot in diameter; to save itself
more trouble than is necessary, it will stop when it has gnawed the
trunk till there is only a narrow core left, having the wit to know that
the autumn gales will do the rest.]

[Illustration: _Photo: F. R. Hinkins & Son._

THE THRUSH AT ITS ANVIL

The song-thrush takes the snail's shell in its bill, and knocks it
against a stone until it breaks, making the palatable flesh available.

Many broken shells are often found around the anvil.]

As to the other senses, touch is not highly developed except about the
bill, where it reaches a climax in birds like the wood-cock, which probe
for unseen earthworms in the soft soil. Taste seems to be poorly
developed, for most birds bolt their food, but there is sometimes an
emphatic rejection of unpalatable things, like toads and caterpillars.
Of smell in birds little is known, but it has been proved to be present
in certain cases, e.g. in some nocturnal birds of prey. It seems certain
that it is by sight, not by smell, that the eagles gather to the
carcass; but perhaps there is more smell in birds than they are usually
credited with. One would like to experiment with the oil from the preen
gland of birds to see whether the scent of this does not help in the
recognition of kin by kin at night or amid the darkness of the forest.
There may be other senses in birds, such as a sense of temperature and a
sense of balance; but no success has attended the attempts made to
demonstrate a magnetic sense, which has been impatiently postulated by
students of bird migration in order to "explain" how the birds find
their way. The big fact is that in birds there are two widely open
gateways of knowledge, the sense of sight and the sense of hearing.


Instinctive Aptitudes

Many a young water-bird, such as a coot, swims right away when it is
tumbled into water for the first time. So chicks peck without any
learning or teaching, very young ducklings catch small moths that flit
by, and young plovers lie low when the danger-signal sounds. But birds
seem strangely limited as regards many of these instinctive
capacities--limited when compared with the "little-brained" ants and
bees, which have from the first such a rich repertory of ready-made
cleverness. The limitation in birds is of great interest, for it means
that intelligence is coming to its own and is going to take up the
reins at many corners of the daily round. Professor Lloyd Morgan
observed that his chickens incubated in the laboratory had no
instinctive awareness of the significance of their mother's cluck when
she was brought outside the door. Although thirsty and willing to drink
from a moistened finger-tip, they did not instinctively recognize water,
even when they walked through a saucerful. Only when they happened to
peck their toes as they stood in the water did they appreciate water as
the stuff they wanted, and raise their bills up to the sky. Once or
twice they actually stuffed their crops with "worms" of red worsted!

Instinctive aptitudes, then, the young birds have, but these are more
limited than in ants, bees, and wasps; and the reason is to be found in
the fact that the brain is now evolving on the tack of what Sir Ray
Lankester has called "educability." Young birds _learn_ with prodigious
rapidity; the emancipation of the mind from the tyranny of hereditary
obligations has begun. Young birds make mistakes, like the red worsted
mistake, but they do not make the same mistakes often. They are able to
profit by experience in a very rapid way. We do not mean that creatures
of the little-brain type, like ants, bees, and wasps, are unable to
profit by experience or are without intelligence. There are no such
hard-and-fast lines. We mean that in the ordinary life of insects the
enregistered instinctive capacities are on the whole sufficient for the
occasion, and that intelligent educability is very slightly developed.
Nor do we mean that birds are quite emancipated from the tyranny of
engrained instinctive obligations, and can always "ring up" intelligence
in a way that is impossible for the stereotyped bee. The sight of a
pigeon brooding on an empty nest, while her two eggs lie disregarded
only a couple of inches away, is enough to show that along certain lines
birds may find it impossible to get free from the trammels of instinct.
The peculiar interest of birds is that they have many instincts and yet
a notable power of learning intelligently.


Intelligence co-operating with Instinct

Professor Lloyd Morgan was foster-parent to two moorhens which grew up
in isolation from their kindred. They swam instinctively, but they would
not dive, neither in a large bath nor in a current. But it happened one
day when one of these moorhens was swimming in a pool on a Yorkshire
stream, that a puppy came barking down the bank and made an awkward
feint towards the young bird. In a moment the moorhen dived, disappeared
from view, and soon partially reappeared, his head just peeping above
the water beneath the overhanging bank. This was the first time the bird
had dived, and the performance was absolutely true to type.

There can be little doubt as to the meaning of this observation. The
moorhen has an hereditary or instinctive capacity for swimming and
diving, but the latter is not so easily called into activity as the
former. The particular moorhen in question had enjoyed about two months
of swimming experience, which probably counted for something, but in the
course of that experience nothing had pulled the trigger of the diving
capacity. On an eventful day the young moorhen saw and heard the dog; it
was emotionally excited; it probably did to some extent intelligently
appreciate a novel and meaningful situation. Intelligence cooperated
with instinct, and the bird dived appropriately.

Birds have inborn predispositions to certain effective ways of pecking,
scratching, swimming, diving, flying, crouching, lying low,
nest-building, and so on; but they are marked off from the much more
purely instinctive ants and bees by the extent to which individual
"nurture" seems to mingle with the inherited "nature." The two together
result in the fine product which we call the bird's behaviour. After
Lloyd Morgan's chicks had tried a few conspicuous and unpalatable
caterpillars, they had no use for any more. They learned in their early
days with prodigious rapidity, illustrating the deep difference between
the "big-brain" type, relatively poor in its endowment of instinctive
capacities, but eminently "educable," and the "little-brain" type, say,
of ants and bees, richly endowed with instinctive capacities, but very
far from being quick or glad to learn. We owe it to Sir Ray Lankester to
have made it clear that these two types of brain are, as it were, on
different tacks of evolution, and should not be directly pitted against
one another. The "little-brain" type makes for a climax in the ant,
where instinctive behaviour reaches a high degree of perfection; the
"big-brain" type reaches its climax in horse and dog, in elephant and
monkey. The particular interest that attaches to the behaviour of birds
is in the combination of a good deal of instinct with a great deal of
intelligent learning. This is well illustrated when birds make a nest
out of new materials or in some quite novel situation. It is clearly
seen when birds turn to some new kind of food, like the Kea parrot,
which attacks the sheep in New Zealand.

Some young woodpeckers are quite clever in opening fir cones to get at
the seeds, and this might be hastily referred to a well-defined
hereditary capacity. But the facts are that the parents bring their
young ones first the seeds themselves, then partly opened cones, and
then intact ones. There is an educative process, and so it is in scores
of cases.


Using their Wits

When the Greek eagle lifts the Greek tortoise in its talons, and lets it
fall from a height so that the strong carapace is broken and the flesh
exposed, it is making intelligent use of an expedient. Whether it
discovered the expedient by experimenting, as is possible, or by chance,
as is more likely, it uses it intelligently. In the same way
herring-gulls lift sea-urchins and clams in their bills, and let them
fall on the rocks so that the shells are broken. In the same way rooks
deal with freshwater mussels.


The Thrush's Anvil

A very instructive case is the behaviour of the song-thrush when it
takes a wood-snail in its beak and hammers it against a stone, its
so-called anvil. To a young thrush, which she had brought up by hand,
Miss Frances Pitt offered some wood-snails, but it took no interest in
them until one put out its head and began to move about. The bird then
pecked at the snail's horns, but was evidently puzzled when the creature
retreated within the shelter of the shell. This happened over and over
again, the thrush's inquisitive interest increasing day by day. It
pecked at the shell and even picked it up by the lip, but no real
progress was made till the sixth day, when the thrush seized the snail
and beat it on the ground as it would a big worm. On the same day it
picked up a shell and knocked it repeatedly against a stone, trying
first one snail and then another. After fifteen minutes' hard work, the
thrush managed to break one, and after that it was all easy. A certain
predisposition to beat things on the ground was doubtless present, but
the experiment showed that the use of an anvil could be arrived at by an
untutored bird. After prolonged trying it found out how to deal with a
difficult situation. It may be said that in more natural conditions this
might be picked up by imitation, but while this is quite possible, it is
useful to notice that experiments with animals lead us to doubt whether
imitation counts for nearly so much as used to be believed.


§ 6

The Mind of the Mammal

When we watch a collie at a sheep-driving competition, or an elephant
helping the forester, or a horse shunting waggons at a railway siding,
we are apt to be too generous to the mammal mind. For in the cases we
have just mentioned, part of man's mind has, so to speak, got into the
animal's. On the other hand, when we study rabbits and guinea-pigs, we
are apt to be too stingy, for these rodents are under the average of
mammals, and those that live in domestication illustrate the stupefying
effect of a too sheltered life. The same applies to domesticated sheep
contrasted with wild sheep, or even with their own lambs. If we are to
form a sound judgment on the intelligence of mammals we must not attend
too much to those that have profited by man's training, nor to those
whose mental life has been dulled by domestication.


Instinctive Aptitudes

What is to be said of the behaviour of beavers who gnaw the base of a
tree with their chisel-edged teeth till only a narrow core is left--to
snap in the first gale, bringing the useful branches down to the ground?
What is to be said of the harvest-mouse constructing its nest, or of the
squirrel making cache after cache of nuts? These and many similar pieces
of behaviour are fundamentally instinctive, due to inborn
predispositions of nerve-cells and muscle-cells. But in mammals they
seem to be often attended by a certain amount of intelligent attention,
saving the creature from the tyranny of routine so marked in the ways of
ants and bees.


Sheer Dexterity

Besides instinctive aptitudes, which are exhibited in almost equal
perfection by all the members of the same species, there are acquired
dexterities which depend on individual opportunities. They are also
marked by being outside and beyond ordinary routine--not that any
rigorous boundary line can be drawn. We read that at Mathura on the
Jumna doles of food are provided by the piety of pilgrims for the sacred
river-tortoises, which are so crowded when there is food going that
their smooth carapaces form a more or less continuous raft across the
river. On that unsteady slippery bridge the Langur monkeys
(_Semnopithecus entellus_) venture out and in spite of vicious snaps
secure a share of the booty. This picture of the monkeys securing a
footing on the moving mass of turtle-backs is almost a diagram of sheer
dexterity. It illustrates the spirit of adventure, the will to
experiment, which is, we believe, the main motive-force in new
departures in behaviour.

[Illustration: _Photo: Lafayette_

ALSATIAN WOLF-DOG

An animal of acute senses and great intelligence. It was of great
service in the war.

(The dog shown, Arno von Indetal, is a trained police dog and did
service abroad during the war.)]

[Illustration: _Photo: W. S. Berridge._

THE POLAR BEAR OF THE FAR NORTH

An animal of extraordinary strength, able with a stroke of its paw to
lift a big seal right out of the water and send it crashing along the
ice. The food consists chiefly of seals. The sexes wander separately. A
hole is often dug as a winter retreat, but there is no hibernation. A
polar bear in captivity has been seen making a current with its paw in
the water of its pool in order to secure floating buns without
trouble--an instance of sheer intelligence.]

[Illustration: _From the Smithsonian Report_, 1914

AN ALLIGATOR "YAWNING" IN EXPECTATION OF FOOD

Note the large number of sharp conical teeth fixed in sockets along the
jaws.]