§ 6

THE ELECTRON THEORY, OR THE NEW VIEW OF MATTER

The Structure of the Atom

There is general agreement amongst all chemists, physicists, and
mathematicians upon the conclusions which we have so far given. We know
that the atoms of matter are constantly--either spontaneously or under
stimulation--giving off electrons, or breaking up into electrons; and
they therefore contain electrons. Thus we have now complete proof of the
independent existence of atoms and also of electrons.

When, however, the man of science tries to tell us _how_ electrons
compose atoms, he passes from facts to speculation, and very difficult
speculation. Take the letter "o" as it is printed on this page. In a
little bubble of hydrogen gas no larger than that letter there are
_trillions_ of atoms; and they are not packed together, but are
circulating as freely as dancers in a ball-room. We are asking the
physicist to take one of these minute atoms and tell us how the still
smaller electrons are arranged in it. Naturally he can only make mental
pictures, guesses or hypotheses, which he tries to fit to the facts, and
discards when they will _not_ fit.

At present, after nearly twenty years of critical discussion, there are
two chief theories of the structure of the atom. At first Sir J. J.
Thomson imagined the electrons circulating in shells (like the layers of
an onion) round the nucleus of the atom. This did not suit, and Sir E.
Rutherford and others worked out a theory that the electrons circulated
round a nucleus rather like the planets of our solar system revolving
round the central sun. Is there a nucleus, then, round which the
electrons revolve? The electron, as we saw, is a disembodied atom of
electricity; we should say, of "negative" electricity. Let us picture
these electrons all moving round in orbits with great velocity. Now it
is suggested that there is a nucleus of "positive" electricity
attracting or pulling the revolving electrons to it, and so forming an
equilibrium, otherwise the electrons would fly off in all directions.
This nucleus has been recently named the proton. We have thus two
electricities in the atom: the positive = the nucleus; the negative =
the electron. Of recent years Dr. Langmuir has put out a theory that the
electrons do not _revolve round_ the nucleus, but remain in a state of
violent agitation of some sort at fixed distances from the nucleus.

[Illustration: PROFESSOR SIR J. J. THOMSON

Experimental discoverer of the electronic constitution of matter, in the
Cavendish Physical Laboratory, Cambridge. A great investigator, noted
for the imaginative range of his hypotheses and his fertility in
experimental devices.]

[Illustration: _From the Smithsonian Report_, 1915.

ELECTRONS PRODUCED BY PASSAGE OF X-RAYS THROUGH AIR

A photograph clearly showing that electrons are definite entities. As
electrons leave atoms they may traverse matter or pass through the air
in a straight path The illustration shows the tortuous path of electrons
resulting from collision with atoms.]

[Illustration: MAGNETIC DEFLECTION OF RADIUM RAYS

The radium rays are made to strike a screen, producing visible spots of
light. When a magnetic field is applied the rays are seen to be
deflected, as in the diagram. This can only happen if the rays carry an
electric charge, and it was by experiments of this kind that we obtained
our knowledge respecting the electric charges carried by radium rays.]

[Illustration: _Reproduced by permission of "Scientific American."_

PROFESSOR R. A. MILLIKAN'S APPARATUS FOR COUNTING ELECTRONS]

But we will confine ourselves here to the facts, and leave the
contending theories to scientific men. It is now pretty generally
accepted that an atom of matter consists of a number of electrons, or
charges of negative electricity, held together by a charge of positive
electricity. It is not disputed that these electrons are in a state of
violent motion or strain, and that therefore a vast energy is locked up
in the atoms of matter. To that we will return later. Here, rather, we
will notice another remarkable discovery which helps us to understand
the nature of matter.

A brilliant young man of science who was killed in the war, Mr. Moseley,
some years ago showed that, when the atoms of different substances are
arranged in order of their weight, _they are also arranged in the order
of increasing complexity of structure_. That is to say, the heavier the
atom, the more electrons it contains. There is a gradual building up of
atoms containing more and more electrons from the lightest atom to the
heaviest. Here it is enough to say that as he took element after
element, from the lightest (hydrogen) to the heaviest (uranium) he found
a strangely regular relation between them. If hydrogen were represented
by the figure one, helium by two, lithium three, and so on up to
uranium, then uranium should have the figure ninety-two. This makes it
probable that there are in nature ninety-two elements--we have found
eighty-seven--and that the number Mr. Moseley found is the number of
electrons in the atom of each element; that is to say, the number is
arranged in order of the atomic numbers of the various elements.


§ 7

The New View of Matter

Up to the point we have reached, then, we see what the new view of
Matter is. Every atom of matter, of whatever kind throughout the whole
universe, is built up of electrons in conjunction with a nucleus. From
the smallest atom of all--the atom of hydrogen--which consists of one
electron, rotating round a positively charged nucleus, to a heavy
complicated atom, such as the atom of gold, constituted of many
electrons and a complex nucleus, _we have only to do with positive and
negative units of electricity_. The electron and its nucleus are
particles of electricity. All Matter, therefore, is nothing but a
manifestation of electricity. The atoms of matter, as we saw, combine
and form molecules. Atoms and molecules are the bricks out of which
nature has built up everything; ourselves, the earth, the stars, the
whole universe.

But more than bricks are required to build a house. There are other
fundamental existences, such as the various forms of energy, which give
rise to several complex problems. And we have also to remember, that
there are more than eighty distinct elements, each with its own definite
type of atom. We shall deal with energy later. Meanwhile it remains to
be said that, although we have discovered a great deal about the
electron and the constitution of matter, and that while the physicists
of our own day seem to see a possibility of explaining positive and
negative electricity, the nature of them both is unknown. There exists
the theory that the particles of positive and negative electricity,
which make up the atoms of matter, are points or centres of disturbances
of some kind in a universal ether, and that all the various forms of
energy are, in some fundamental way, aspects of the same primary entity
which constitutes matter itself.

But the discovery of the property of radio-activity has raised many
other interesting questions, besides that which we have just dealt with.
In radio-active elements, such as uranium for example, the element is
breaking down; in what we call radio-activity we have a manifestation of
the spontaneous change of elements. What is really taking place is a
transmutation of one element into another, from a heavier to a lighter.
The element uranium spontaneously becomes radium, and radium passes
through a number of other stages until it, in turn, becomes lead. Each
descending element is of lighter atomic weight than its predecessor. The
changing process, of course, is a very slow one. It may be that all
matter is radio-active, or can be made so. This raises the question
whether all the matter in the universe may not undergo disintegration.

There is, however, another side of the question, which the discovery of
radio-activity has brought to light, and which has effected a revolution
in our views. We have seen that in radio-active substances the elements
are breaking down. Is there a process of building up at work? If the
more complicated atoms are breaking down into simpler forms, may there
not be a converse process--a building up from simpler elements to more
complicated elements? It is probably the case that both processes are at
work.

There are some eighty-odd chemical elements on the earth to-day: are
they all the outcome of an inorganic evolution, element giving rise to
element, going back and back to some primeval stuff from which they
were all originally derived infinitely long ago? Is there an evolution
in the inorganic world which may be going on, parallel to that of the
evolution of living things; or is organic evolution a continuation of
inorganic evolution? We have seen what evidence there is of this
inorganic evolution in the case of the stars. We cannot go deeply into
the matter here, nor has the time come for any direct statement that can
be based on the findings of modern investigation. Taking it altogether
the evidence is steadily accumulating, and there are authorities who
maintain that already the evidence of inorganic evolution is convincing
enough. The heavier atoms would appear to behave as though they were
evolved from the lighter. The more complex forms, it is supposed, have
_evolved_ from the simpler forms. Moseley's discovery, to which
reference has been made, points to the conclusion that the elements are
built up one from another.


§ 8

Other New Views

We may here refer to another new conception to which the discovery of
radio-activity has given rise. Lord Kelvin, who estimated the age of the
earth at twenty million years, reached this estimate by considering the
earth as a body which is gradually cooling down, "losing its primitive
heat, like a loaf taken from the oven, at a rate which could be
calculated, and that the heat radiated by the sun was due to
contraction." Uranium and radio-activity were not known to Kelvin, and
their discovery has upset both his arguments. Radio-active substances,
which are perpetually giving out heat, introduce an entirely new factor.
We cannot now assume that the earth is necessarily cooling down; it may
even, for all we know, be getting hotter. At the 1921 meeting of the
British Association, Professor Rayleigh stated that further knowledge
had extended the probable period during which there had been life on
this globe to about one thousand million years, and the total age of
the earth to some small multiple of that. The earth, he considers, is
not cooling, but "contains an internal source of heat from the
disintegration of uranium in the outer crust." On the whole the estimate
obtained would seem to be in agreement with the geological estimates.
The question, of course, cannot, in the present state of our knowledge,
be settled within fixed limits that meet with general agreement.

[Illustration: MAKING THE INVISIBLE VISIBLE

Radium, as explained in the text, emits rays--the "Alpha," the "Beta"
(electrons), and "Gamma" rays. The above illustration indicates the
method by which these invisible rays are made visible, and enables the
nature of the rays to be investigated. To the right of the diagram is
the instrument used, the Spinthariscope, making the impact of radium
rays visible on a screen.

The radium rays shoot out in all directions; those that fall on the
screen make it glow with points of light. These points of light are
observed by the magnifying lens.

A. Magnifying lens. B. A zinc sulphite screen. C. A needle on whose
point is placed a speck of radium.

The lower picture shows the screen and needle magnified.]

[Illustration: THE THEORY OF ELECTRONS

An atom of matter is composed of electrons. We picture an atom as a sort
of miniature solar system, the electrons (particles of negative
electricity) rotating round a central nucleus of positive electricity,
as described in the text. In the above pictorial representation of an
atom the whirling electrons are indicated in the outer ring. Electrons
move with incredible speed as they pass from one atom to another.]

[Illustration: ARRANGEMENTS OF ATOMS IN A DIAMOND

The above is a model (seen from two points of view) of the arrangement
of the atoms in a diamond. The arrangement is found by studying the
X-ray spectra of the diamond.]

As we have said, there are other fundamental existences which give rise
to more complex problems. The three great fundamental entities in the
physical universe are matter, ether, and energy; so far as we know,
outside these there is nothing. We have dealt with matter, there remain
ether and energy. We shall see that just as no particle of matter,
however small, may be created or destroyed, and just as there is no such
thing as empty space--ether pervades everything--so there is no such
thing as _rest_. Every particle that goes to make up our solid earth is
in a state of perpetual unremitting vibration; energy "is the universal
commodity on which all life depends." Separate and distinct as these
three fundamental entities--matter, ether, and energy--may appear, it
may be that, after all, they are only different and mysterious phases of
an essential "oneness" of the universe.


§ 9

The Future

Let us, in concluding this chapter, give just one illustration of the
way in which all this new knowledge may prove to be as valuable
practically as it is wonderful intellectually. We saw that electrons are
shot out of atoms at a speed that may approach 160,000 miles a second.
Sir Oliver Lodge has written recently that a seventieth of a grain of
radium discharges, at a speed a thousand times that of a rifle bullet,
thirty million electrons a second. Professor Le Bon has calculated that
it would take 1,340,000 barrels of powder to give a bullet the speed of
one of these electrons. He shows that the smallest French copper
coin--smaller than a farthing--contains an energy equal to eighty
million horsepower. A few pounds of matter contain more energy than we
could extract from millions of tons of coal. Even in the atoms of
hydrogen at a temperature which we could produce in an electric furnace
the electrons spin round at a rate of nearly a hundred trillion
revolutions a second!

Every man asks at once: "Will science ever tap this energy?" If it does,
no more smoke, no mining, no transit, no bulky fuel. The energy of an
atom is of course only liberated when an atom passes from one state to
another. The stored up energy is fortunately fast bound by the electrons
being held together as has been described. If it were not so "the earth
would explode and become a gaseous nebula"! It is believed that some day
we shall be able to release, harness, and utilise atomic energy. "I am
of opinion," says Sir William Bragg, "that atom energy will supply our
future need. A thousand years may pass before we can harness the atom,
or to-morrow might see us with the reins in our hands. That is the
peculiarity of Physics--research and 'accidental' discovery go hand in
hand." Half a brick contains as much energy as a small coal-field. The
difficulties are tremendous, but, as Sir Oliver Lodge reminds us, there
was just as much scepticism at one time about the utilisation of steam
or electricity. "Is it to be supposed," he asks, "that there can be no
fresh invention, that all the discoveries have been made?" More than one
man of science encourages us to hope. Here are some remarkable words
written by Professor Soddy, one of the highest authorities on
radio-active matter, in our chief scientific weekly (_Nature_, November
6, 1919):

    The prospects of the successful accomplishment of artificial
    transmutation brighten almost daily. The ancients seem to have had
    something more than an inkling that the accomplishment of
    transmutation would confer upon men powers hitherto the prerogative
    of the gods. But now we know definitely that the material aspect of
    transmutation would be of small importance in comparison with the
    control over the inexhaustible stores of internal atomic energy to
    which its successful accomplishment would inevitably lead. It has
    become a problem, no longer redolent of the evil associations of the
    age of alchemy, but one big with the promise of a veritable physical
    renaissance of the whole world.

If that "promise" is ever realised, the economic and social face of the
world will be transformed.

Before passing on to the consideration of ether, light, and energy, let
us see what new light the discovery of the electron has thrown on the
nature and manipulation of electricity.


WHAT IS ELECTRICITY?

The Nature of Electricity

There is at least one manifestation in nature, and so late as twenty
years ago it seemed to be one of the most mysterious manifestations of
all, which has been in great measure explained by the new discoveries.
Already, at the beginning of this century, we spoke of our "age of
electricity," yet there were few things in nature about which we knew
less. The "electric current" rang our bells, drove our trains, lit our
rooms, but none knew what the current was. There was a vague idea that
it was a sort of fluid that flowed along copper wires as water flows in
a pipe. We now suppose that it is _a rapid movement of electrons from
atom to atom_ in the wire or wherever the current is.

Let us try to grasp the principle of the new view of electricity and see
how it applies to all the varied electrical phenomena in the world about
us. As we saw, the nucleus of an atom of matter consists of positive
electricity which holds together a number of electrons, or charges of
negative electricity.[4] This certainly tells us to some extent what
electricity is, and how it is related to matter, but it leaves us with
the usual difficulty about fundamental realities. But we now know that
electricity, like matter, is atomic in structure; a charge of
electricity is made up of a number of small units or charges of a
definite, constant amount. It has been suggested that the two kinds of
electricity, i.e. positive and negative, are right-handed and
left-handed vortices or whirlpools in ether, or rings in ether, but
there are very serious difficulties, and we leave this to the future.

    [4] The words "positive" and "negative" electricity belong to the
    days when it was regarded as a fluid. A body overcharged with the
    fluid was called positive; an undercharged body was called negative.
    A positively-electrified body is now one whose atoms have lost some
    of their outlying electrons, so that the positive charge of
    electricity predominates. The negatively-electrified body is one
    with more than the normal number of electrons.


§ 10

What an Electric Current is

The discovery of these two kinds of electricity has, however, enabled us
to understand very fairly what goes on in electrical phenomena. The
outlying electrons, as we saw, may pass from atom to atom, and this, on
a large scale, is the meaning of the electric current. In other words,
we believe an electric current to be a flow of electrons. Let us take,
to begin with, a simple electrical "cell," in which a feeble current is
generated: such a cell as there is in every house to serve its electric
bells.

In the original form this simple sort of "battery" consisted of a plate
of zinc and a plate of copper immersed in a chemical. Long before
anything was known about electrons it was known that, if you put zinc
and copper together, you produce a mild current of electricity. We know
now what this means. Zinc is a metal the atoms of which are particularly
disposed to part with some of their outlying electrons. Why, we do not
know; but the fact is the basis of these small batteries. Electrons from
the atoms of zinc pass to the atoms of copper, and their passage is a
"current." Each atom gives up an electron to its neighbour. It was
further found long ago that if the zinc and copper were immersed in
certain chemicals, which slowly dissolve the zinc, and the two metals
were connected by a copper wire, the current was stronger. In modern
language, there is a brisker flow of electrons. The reason is that
the atoms of zinc which are stolen by the chemical leave their
detachable electrons behind them, and the zinc has therefore more
electrons to pass on to the copper.

[Illustration: DISINTEGRATION OF ATOMS

An atom of Uranium, by ejecting an Alpha particle, becomes Uranium X.
This substance, by ejecting Beta and Gamma rays, becomes Radium. Radium
passes through a number of further changes, as shown in the diagram, and
finally becomes lead. Some radio-active substances disintegrate much
faster than others. Thus Uranium changes very slowly, taking
5,000,000,000 years to reach the same stage of disintegration that
Radium A reaches in 3 minutes. As the disintegration proceeds, the
substances become of lighter and lighter atomic weights. Thus Uranium
has an atomic weight of 238, whereas lead has an atomic weight of only
206. The breaking down of atoms is fully explained in the text.]

[Illustration: _Reproduced by permission from "The Interpretation of
Radium" (John Murray)._

SILK TASSEL ELECTRIFIED

The separate threads of the tassel, being each electrified with the same
kind of electricity, repel one another, and thus the tassel branches out
as in the photograph.]

[Illustration: SILK TASSEL DISCHARGED BY THE RAYS FROM RADIUM

When the radium rays, carrying an opposite electric charge to that on
the tassel, strikes the threads, the threads are neutralised, and hence
fall together again.]

[Illustration: A HUGE ELECTRIC SPARK

This is an actual photograph of an electric spark. It is leaping a
distance of about 10 feet, and is the discharge of a million volts. It
is a graphic illustration of the tremendous energy of electrons.]

[Illustration: _From "Scientific Ideas of To-day_."

ELECTRICAL ATTRACTION BETWEEN COMMON OBJECTS

Take an ordinary flower-vase well dried and energetically rub it with a
silk handkerchief. The vase which thus becomes electrified will attract
any light body, such as a feather, as shown in the above illustration.]

Such cells are now made of zinc and carbon, immersed in sal-ammoniac,
but the principle is the same. The flow of electricity is a flow of
electrons; though we ought to repeat that they do not flow in a body, as
molecules of water do. You may have seen boys place a row of bricks,
each standing on one end, in such order that the first, if it is pushed,
will knock over the second, the second the third, and so on to the last.
There is a flow of _movement_ all along the line, but each brick moves
only a short distance. So an electron merely passes to the next atom,
which sends on an electron to a third atom, and so on. In this case,
however, the movement from atom to atom is so rapid that the ripple of
movement, if we may call it so, may pass along at an enormous speed. We
have seen how swiftly electrons travel.

But how is this turned into power enough even to ring a bell? The actual
mechanical apparatus by which the energy of the electron current is
turned into sound, or heat, or light will be described in a technical
section later in this work. We are concerned here only with the
principle, which is clear. While zinc is very apt to part with
electrons, copper is just as obliging in facilitating their passage
onward. Electrons will travel in this way in most metals, but copper is
one of the best "conductors." So we lengthen the copper wire between the
zinc and the carbon until it goes as far as the front door and the bell,
which are included in the circuit. When you press the button at the
door, two wires are brought together, and the current of electrons
rushes round the circuit; and at the bell its energy is diverted into
the mechanical apparatus which rings the bell.

Copper is a good conductor--six times as good as iron--and is therefore
so common in electrical industries. Some other substances are just as
stubborn as copper is yielding, and we call them "insulators," because
they resist the current instead of letting it flow. Their atoms do not
easily part with electrons. Glass, vulcanite, and porcelain are very
good insulators for this reason.


What the Dynamo does

But even several cells together do not produce the currents needed in
modern industry, and the flow is produced in a different manner. As the
invisible electrons pass along a wire they produce what we call a
magnetic field around the wire, they produce a disturbance in the
surrounding ether. To be exact, it is through the ether surrounding the
wire that the energy originated by the electrons is transmitted. To set
electrons moving on a large scale we use a "dynamo." By means of the
dynamo it is possible to transform mechanical energy into electrical
energy. The modern dynamo, as Professor Soddy puts it, may be looked
upon as an electron pump. We cannot go into the subject deeply here, we
would only say that a large coil of copper wire is caused to turn round
rapidly between the poles of a powerful magnet. That is the essential
construction of the "dynamo," which is used for generating strong
currents. We shall see in a moment how magnetism differs from
electricity, and will say here only that round the poles of a large
magnet there is a field of intense disturbance which will start a flow
of electrons in any copper that is introduced into it. On account of the
speed given to the coil of wire its atoms enter suddenly this magnetic
field, and they give off crowds of electrons in a flash.

It is found that a similar disturbance is caused, though the flow is in
the _opposite_ direction, when the coil of wire leaves the magnetic
field. And as the coil is revolving very rapidly we get a powerful
current of electricity that runs in alternate directions--an
"alternating" current. Electricians have apparatus for converting it
into a continuous current where this is necessary.

A current, therefore, means a steady flow of the electrons from atom to
atom. Sometimes, however, a number of electrons rush violently and
explosively from one body to another, as in the electric spark or the
occasional flash from an electric tram or train. The grandest and most
spectacular display of this phenomenon is the thunderstorm. As we saw
earlier, a portentous furnace like the sun is constantly pouring floods
of electrons from its atoms into space. The earth intercepts great
numbers of these electrons. In the upper regions of the air the stream
of solar electrons has the effect of separating positively-electrified
atoms from negatively-electrified ones, and the water-vapour, which is
constantly rising from the surface of the sea, gathers more freely round
the positively-electrified atoms, and brings them down, as rain, to the
earth. Thus the upper air loses a proportion of positive electricity, or
becomes "negatively electrified." In the thunderstorm we get both kinds
of clouds--some with large excesses of electrons, and some deficient in
electrons--and the tension grows until at last it is relieved by a
sudden and violent discharge of electrons from one cloud to another or
to the earth--an electric spark on a prodigious scale.


§ 11

Magnetism

We have seen that an electric current is really a flow of electrons. Now
an electric current exhibits a magnetic effect. The surrounding space is
endowed with energy which we call electro-magnetic energy. A piece of
magnetised iron attracting other pieces of iron to it is the popular
idea of a magnet. If we arrange a wire to pass vertically through a
piece of cardboard and then sprinkle iron filings on the cardboard we
shall find that, on passing an electric current through the wire, the
iron filings arrange themselves in circles round it. The magnetic force,
due to the electric current, seems to exist in circles round the wire,
an ether disturbance being set up. Even a single electron, when in
movement, creates a magnetic "field," as it is called, round its path.
There is no movement of electrons without this attendant field of
energy, and their motion is not stopped until that field of energy
disappears from the ether. The modern theory of magnetism supposes that
all magnetism is produced in this way. All magnetism is supposed to
arise from the small whirling motions of the electrons contained in the
ultimate atoms of matter. We cannot here go into the details of the
theory nor explain why, for instance, iron behaves so differently from
other substances, but it is sufficient to say that here, also, the
electron theory provides the key. This theory is not yet definitely
_proved_, but it furnishes a sufficient theoretical basis for future
research. The earth itself is a gigantic magnet, a fact which makes the
compass possible, and it is well known that the earth's magnetism is
affected by those great outbreaks on the sun called sun-spots. Now it
has been recently shown that a sun-spot is a vast whirlpool of electrons
and that it exerts a strong magnetic action. There is doubtless a
connection between these outbreaks of electronic activity and the
consequent changes in the earth's magnetism. The precise mechanism of
the connection, however, is still a matter that is being investigated.


ETHER AND WAVES

Ether and Waves

The whole material universe is supposed to be embedded in a vast medium
called the ether. It is true that the notion of the ether has been
abandoned by some modern physicists, but, whether or not it is
ultimately dispensed with, the conception of the ether has entered so
deeply into the scientific mind that the science of physics cannot be
understood unless we know something about the properties attributed to
the ether. The ether was invented to explain the phenomena of light, and
to account for the flow of energy across empty space. Light takes time
to travel. We see the sun at any moment by the light that left it 8
minutes before. It has taken that 8 minutes for the light from the
sun to travel that 93,000,000 miles odd which separates it from our
earth. Besides the fact that light takes time to travel, it can be shown
that light travels in the form of waves. We know that sound travels in
waves; sound consists of waves in the air, or water or wood or whatever
medium we hear it through. If an electric bell be put in a glass jar and
the air be pumped out of the jar, the sound of the bell becomes feebler
and feebler until, when enough air has been taken out, we do not hear
the bell at all. Sound cannot travel in a vacuum. We continue to _see_
the bell, however, so that evidently light can travel in a vacuum. The
invisible medium through which the waves of light travel is the ether,
and this ether permeates all space _and all matter_. Between us and the
stars stretch vast regions empty of all matter. But we see the stars;
their light reaches us, even though it may take centuries to do so. We
conceive, then, that it is the universal ether which conveys that light.
All the energy which has reached the earth from the sun and which,
stored for ages in our coal-fields, is now used to propel our trains and
steamships, to heat and light our cities, to perform all the
multifarious tasks of modern life, was conveyed by the ether. Without
that universal carrier of energy we should have nothing but a stagnant,
lifeless world.

[Illustration: _Photo: Leadbeater._

AN ELECTRIC SPARK

An electric spark consists of a rush of electrons across the space
between the two terminals. A state of tension is established in the
ether by the electric charges, and when this tension passes a certain
limit the discharge takes place.]

[Illustration: _From "Scientific Ideas of To-day."_

AN ETHER DISTURBANCE AROUND AN ELECTRON CURRENT

In the left-hand photograph an electric current is passing through the
coil, thus producing a magnetic field and transforming the poker into a
magnet. The poker is then able to support a pair of scissors. As soon as
the electric current is broken off, as in the second photograph, the
ether disturbance ceases. The poker loses its magnetism, and the
scissors fall.]

We have said that light consists of waves. The ether may be considered
as resembling, in some respects, a jelly. It can transmit vibrations.
The waves of light are really excessively small ripples, measuring from
crest to crest. The distance from crest to crest of the ripples in a
pond is sometimes no more than an inch or two. This distance is
enormously great compared to the longest of the wave-lengths that
constitute light. We say the longest, for the waves of light differ in
length; the colour depends upon the length of the light. Red light has
the longest waves and violet the shortest. The longest waves, the waves
of deep-red light, are seven two hundred and fifty thousandths of an
inch in length (7/250,000 inch). This is nearly twice the length of
deep-violet light-waves, which are 1/67,000 inch. But light-waves, the
waves that affect the eye, are not the only waves carried by the ether.
Waves too short to affect the eye can affect the photographic plate, and
we can discover in this way the existence of waves only half the length
of the deep-violet waves. Still shorter waves can be discovered, until
we come to those excessively minute rays, the X-rays.


Below the Limits of Visibility

But we can extend our investigations in the other direction; we find
that the ether carries many waves longer than light-waves. Special
photographic emulsions can reveal the existence of waves five times
longer than violet-light waves. Extending below the limits of visibility
are waves we detect as heat-waves. Radiant heat, like the heat from a
fire, is also a form of wave-motion in the ether, but the waves our
senses recognise as heat are longer than light-waves. There are longer
waves still, but our senses do not recognise them. But we can detect
them by our instruments. These are the waves used in wireless
telegraphy, and their length may be, in some cases, measured in miles.
These waves are the so-called electro-magnetic waves. Light, radiant
heat, and electro-magnetic waves are all of the same nature; they differ
only as regards their wave-lengths.


LIGHT--VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE

If Light, then, consists of waves transmitted through the ether, what
gives rise to the waves? Whatever sets up such wonderfully rapid series
of waves must be something with an enormous vibration. We come back to
the electron: all atoms of matter, as we have seen, are made up of
electrons revolving in a regular orbit round a nucleus. These electrons
may be affected by out-side influences, they may be agitated and their
speed or vibration increased.


Electrons and Light

The particles even of a piece of cold iron are in a state of vibration.
No nerves of ours are able to feel and register the waves they emit, but
your cold poker is really radiating, or sending out a series of
wave-movements, on every side. After what we saw about the nature of
matter, this will surprise none. Put your poker in the fire for a time.
The particles of the glowing coal, which are violently agitated,
communicate some of their energy to the particles of iron in the poker.
They move to and fro more rapidly, and the waves which they create are
now able to affect your nerves and cause a sensation of heat. Put the
poker again in the fire, until its temperature rises to 500° C. It
begins to glow with a dull red. Its particles are now moving very
violently, and the waves they send out are so short and rapid that they
can be picked up by the eye--we have _visible_ light. They would still
not affect a photographic plate. Heat the iron further, and the crowds
of electrons now send out waves of various lengths which blend into
white light. What is happening is the agitated electrons flying round in
their orbits at a speed of trillions of times a second. Make the iron
"blue hot," and it pours out, in addition to light, the _invisible_
waves which alter the film on the photographic plate. And beyond these
there is a long range of still shorter waves, culminating in the X-rays,
which will pass between the atoms of flesh or stone.

Nearly two hundred and fifty years ago it was proved that light
travelled at least 600,000 times faster than sound. Jupiter, as we saw,
has moons, which circle round it. They pass behind the body of the
planet, and reappear at the other side. But it was noticed that, when
Jupiter is at its greatest distance from us, the reappearance of the
moon from behind it is 16 minutes and 36 seconds later than when the
planet is nearest to us. Plainly this was because light took so long to
cover the additional distance. The distance was then imperfectly known,
and the speed of light was underrated. We now know the distance, and we
easily get the velocity of light.

No doubt it seems far more wonderful to discover this within the walls
of a laboratory, but it was done as long ago as 1850. A cogged wheel is
so mounted that a ray of light passes between two of the teeth and is
reflected back from a mirror. Now, slight as is the fraction of a second
which light takes to travel that distance, it is possible to give such
speed to the wheel that the next tooth catches the ray of light on its
return and cuts it off. The speed is increased still further until the
ray of light returns to the eye of the observer through the notch _next_
to the one by which it had passed to the mirror! The speed of the wheel
was known, and it was thus possible again to gather the velocity of
light. If the shortest waves are 1/67,000 of an inch in length, and
light travels at 186,000 miles a second, any person can work out that
about 800 trillion waves enter the eye in a second when we see "violet."


Sorting out Light-waves

The waves sent out on every side by the energetic electrons become
faintly visible to us when they reach about 1/35,000 of an inch. As they
become shorter and more rapid, as the electrons increase their speed, we
get, in succession, the colours red, orange, yellow, green, blue,
indigo, and violet. Each distinct sensation of colour means a wave of
different length. When they are all mingled together, as in the light of
the sun, we get white light. When this white light passes through glass,
the speed of the waves is lessened; and, if the ray of light falls
obliquely on a triangular piece of glass, the waves of different lengths
part company as they travel through it, and the light is spread out in a
band of rainbow-colour. The waves are sorted out according to their
lengths in the "obstacle race" through the glass. Anyone may see this
for himself by holding up a wedge-shaped piece of crystal between the
sunlight and the eye; the prism separates the sunlight into its
constituent colours, and these various colours will be seen quite
readily. Or the thing may be realised in another way. If the seven
colours are painted on a wheel as shown opposite page 280 (in the
proportion shown), and the wheel rapidly revolved on a pivot, the wheel
will appear a dull white, the several colours will not be seen. But
_omit_ one of the colours, then the wheel, when revolved, will not
appear white, but will give the impression of one colour, corresponding
to what the union of six colours gives. Another experiment will show
that some bodies held up between the eye and a white light will not
permit all the rays to pass through, but will intercept some; a body
that intercepts all the seven rays except red will give the impression
of red, or if all the rays except violet, then violet will be the colour
seen.

[Illustration: _Photo: H. J. Shepstone._

LIGHTNING

In a thunderstorm we have the most spectacular display in lightning of a
violent and explosive rush of electrons (electricity) from one body to
another, from cloud to cloud, or to the earth. In this wonderful
photograph of an electrical storm note the long branched and undulating
flashes of lightning. Each flash lasts no longer than the one
hundred-thousandth part of a second of time.]

[Illustration: LIGHT WAVES

Light consists of waves transmitted through the ether. Waves of light
differ in length. The colour of the light depends on the wave-length.
Deep-red waves (the longest) are 7/250000 inch and deep-violet waves
1/67000 inch. The diagram shows two wave-motions of different
wave-lengths. From crest to crest, or from trough to trough, is the
length of the wave.]

[Illustration: THE MAGNETIC CIRCUIT OF AN ELECTRIC CURRENT

The electric current passing in the direction of the arrow round the
electric circuit generates in the surrounding space circular magnetic
circuits as shown in the diagram. It is this property which lies at the
base of the electro-magnet and of the electric dynamo.]

[Illustration: THE MAGNET

The illustration shows the lines of force between two magnets. The lines
of force proceed from the north pole of one magnet to the south pole of
the other. They also proceed from the north to the south poles of the
same magnet. These facts are shown clearly in the diagram. The north
pole of a magnet is that end of it which turns to the north when the
magnet is freely suspended.]


The Fate of the World

Professor Soddy has given an interesting picture of what might happen
when the sun's light and heat is no longer what it is. The human eye
"has adapted itself through the ages to the peculiarities of the sun's
light, so as to make the most of that wave-length of which there is
most.... Let us indulge for a moment in these gloomy prognostications,
as to the consequences to this earth of the cooling of the sun with the
lapse of ages, which used to be in vogue, but which radio-activity has
so rudely shaken. Picture the fate of the world when the sun has become
a dull red-hot ball, or even when it has cooled so far that it would no
longer emit light to us. That does not all mean that the world would be
in inky darkness, and that the sun would not emit light to the people
then inhabiting this world, if any had survived and could keep
themselves from freezing. To such, if the eye continued to adapt itself
to the changing conditions, our blues and violets would be ultra-violet
and invisible, but our dark heat would be light and hot bodies would be
luminous to them which would be dark to us."


§ 12

What the Blue "Sky" means

We saw in a previous chapter how the spectroscope splits up light-waves
into their colours. But nature is constantly splitting the light into
its different-lengthed waves, its colours. The rainbow, where dense
moisture in the air acts as a spectroscope, is the most familiar
example. A piece of mother-of-pearl, or even a film of oil on the street
or on water, has the same effect, owing to the fine inequalities in its
surface. The atmosphere all day long is sorting out the waves. The blue
"sky" overhead means that the fine particles in the upper atmosphere
catch the shorter waves, the blue waves, and scatter them. We can make a
tubeful of blue sky in the laboratory at any time. The beautiful
pink-flush on the Alps at sunrise, the red glory that lingers in the
west at sunset, mean that, as the sun's rays must struggle through
denser masses of air when it is low on the horizon, the long red waves
are sifted out from the other shafts.

Then there is the varied face of nature which, by absorbing some waves
and reflecting others, weaves its own beautiful robe of colour. Here and
there is a black patch, which _absorbs_ all the light. White surfaces
_reflect_ the whole of it. What is reflected depends on the period of
vibration of the electrons in the particular kind of matter. Generally,
as the electrons receive the flood of trillions of waves, they absorb
either the long or the medium or the short, and they give us the
wonderful colour-scheme of nature. In some cases the electrons continue
to radiate long after the sunlight has ceased to fall upon them. We get
from them "black" or invisible light, and we can take photographs by it.
Other bodies, like glass, vibrate in unison with the period of the
light-waves and let them stream through.


Light without Heat

There are substances--"phosphorescent" things we call them--which give
out a mysterious cold light of their own. It is one of the problems
of science, and one of profound practical interest. If we could produce
light without heat our "gas bill" would shrink amazingly. So much energy
is wasted in the production of heat-waves and ultra-violet waves which
we do not want, that 90 per cent. or more of the power used in
illumination is wasted. Would that the glow-worm, or even the dead
herring, would yield us its secret! Phosphorus is the one thing we know
as yet that suits the purpose, and--it smells! Indeed, our artificial
light is not only extravagant in cost, but often poor in colour. The
unwary person often buys a garment by artificial light, and is disgusted
next morning to find in it a colour which is not wanted. The colour
disclosed by the sun was not in the waves of the artificial light.

[Illustration: ROTATING DISC OF SIR ISAAC NEWTON FOR MIXING COLOURS

The Spectroscope sorts out the above seven colours from sunlight (which
is compounded of these seven colours). If painted in proper proportions
on a wheel, as shown in the coloured illustration, and the wheel be
turned rapidly on a pivot through its centre, only a dull white will be
perceived. If one colour be omitted, the result will be one colour--the
result of the union of the remaining six.]

Beyond the waves of violet light are the still shorter and more rapid
waves--the "ultra-violet" waves--which are precious to the photographer.
As every amateur knows, his plate may safely be exposed to light that
comes through a red or an orange screen. Such a screen means "no
thoroughfare" for the blue and "beyond-blue" waves, and it is these
which arrange the little grains of silver on the plate. It is the same
waves which supply the energy to the little green grains of matter
(chlorophyll) in the plant, preparing our food and timber for us, as
will be seen later. The tree struggles upward and spreads out its leaves
fanwise to the blue sky to receive them. In our coal-measures, the
mighty dead forests of long ago, are vast stores of sunlight which we
are prodigally using up.

The X-rays are the extreme end, the highest octave, of the series of
waves. Their power of penetration implies that they are excessively
minute, but even these have not held their secret from the modern
physicist. From a series of beautiful experiments, in which they were
made to pass amongst the atoms of a crystal, we learned their length. It
is about the ten-millionth of a millimetre, and a millimetre is about
the 1/25 of an inch!

One of the most recent discoveries, made during a recent eclipse of the
sun, is that light is subject to gravitation. A ray of light from a star
is bent out of its straight path when it passes near the mass of the
sun. Professor Eddington tells us that we have as much right to speak of
a pound of light as of a pound of sugar. Professor Eddington even
calculates that the earth receives 160 tons of light from the sun every
year!


ENERGY: HOW ALL LIFE DEPENDS ON IT

As we have seen in an earlier chapter, one of the fundamental entities
of the universe is matter. A second, not less important, is called
energy. Energy is indispensable if the world is to continue to exist,
since all phenomena, including life, depend on it. Just as it is humanly
impossible to create or to destroy a particle of matter, so is it
impossible to create or to destroy energy. This statement will be more
readily understood when we have considered what energy is.

Energy, like matter, is indestructible, and just as matter exists in
various forms so does energy. And we may add, just as we are ignorant of
what the negative and positive particles of electricity which constitute
matter really are, so we are ignorant of the true nature of energy. At
the same time, energy is not so completely mysterious as it once was. It
is another of nature's mysteries which the advance of modern science has
in some measure unveiled. It was only during the nineteenth century that
energy came to be known as something as distinct and permanent as matter
itself.


Forms of Energy

The existence of various forms of energy had been known, of course, for
ages; there was the energy of a falling stone, the energy produced by
burning wood or coal or any other substance, but the essential
_identity_ of all these forms of energy had not been suspected. The
conception of energy as something which, like matter, was constant in
amount, which could not be created nor destroyed, was one of the great
scientific acquisitions of the past century.

[Illustration: WAVE SHAPES

Wave-motions are often complex. The above illustration shows some fairly
complicated wave shapes. All such wave-motions can be produced by
superposing a number of simple wave forms.]

[Illustration: THE POWER OF A MAGNET

The illustration is that of a "Phoenix" electric magnet lifting scrap
from railway trucks. The magnet is 52 inches in diameter and lifts a
weight of 26 tons. The same type of magnet, 62 inches in diameter, lifts
a weight of 40 tons.]

[Illustration: _Photo: The Locomotive Publishing Co., Ltd._

THE SPEED OF LIGHT

A train travelling at the rate of sixty miles per hour would take rather
more than seventeen and a quarter days to go round the earth at the
equator, i.e. a distance of 25,000 miles. Light, which travels at the
rate of 186,000 miles per second, would take between one-seventh and
one-eighth of a second to go the same distance.]

[Illustration: ROTATING DISC OF SIR ISAAC NEWTON FOR MIXING COLOURS

The Spectroscope sorts out the above seven colours from sunlight (which
is compounded of these seven colours). If painted in proper proportions
on a wheel, as shown in the coloured illustration, and the wheel turned
rapidly on a pivot through its centre, only a dull white will be
perceived. If one colour be omitted, the result will be one colour--the
result of the union of the remaining six.]

It is not possible to enter deeply into this subject here. It is
sufficient if we briefly outline its salient aspects. Energy is
recognised in two forms, kinetic and potential. The form of energy which
is most apparent to us is the _energy of motion_; for example, a rolling
stone, running water, a falling body, and so on. We call the energy of
motion _kinetic energy_. Potential energy is the energy a body has in
virtue of its position--it is its capacity, in other words, to acquire
kinetic energy, as in the case of a stone resting on the edge of a
cliff.

Energy may assume different forms; one kind of energy may be converted
directly or indirectly into some other form. The energy of burning coal,
for example, is converted into heat, and from heat energy we have
mechanical energy, such as that manifested by the steam-engine. In this
way we can transfer energy from one body to another. There is the energy
of the great waterfalls of Niagara, for instance, which are used to
supply the energy of huge electric power stations.


What Heat is

An important fact about energy is, that all energy _tends to take the
form of heat energy_. The impact of a falling stone generates heat; a
waterfall is hotter at the bottom than at the top--the falling particles
of water, on striking the ground, generate heat; and most chemical
changes are attended by heat changes. Energy may remain latent
indefinitely in a lump of wood, but in combustion it is liberated, and
we have heat as a result. The atom of radium or of any other
radio-active substance, as it disintegrates, generates heat. "Every hour
radium generates sufficient heat to raise the temperature of its own
weight of water, from the freezing point to the boiling point." And what
is heat? _Heat is molecular motion._ The molecules of every substance,
as we have seen on a previous page, are in a state of continual motion,
and the more vigorous the motion the hotter the body. As wood or coal
burns, the invisible molecules of these substances are violently
agitated, and give rise to ether waves which our senses interpret as
light and heat. In this constant movement of the molecules, then, we
have a manifestation of the energy of motion and of heat.

That energy which disappears in one form reappears in another has been
found to be universally true. It was Joule who, by churning water, first
showed that a measurable quantity of mechanical energy could be
transformed into a measurable quantity of heat energy. By causing an
apparatus to stir water vigorously, that apparatus being driven by
falling weights or a rotating flywheel or by any other mechanical means,
the water became heated. A certain amount of mechanical energy had been
used up and a certain amount of heat had appeared. The relation between
these two things was found to be invariable. Every physical change in
nature involves a transformation of energy, but the total quantity of
energy in the universe remains unaltered. This is the great doctrine of
the Conservation of Energy.


§ 13

Substitutes for Coal

Consider the source of nearly all the energy which is used in modern
civilisation--coal. The great forests of the Carboniferous epoch now
exists as beds of coal. By the burning of coal--a chemical
transformation--the heat energy is produced on which at present our
whole civilisation depends. Whence is the energy locked up in the coal
derived? From the sun. For millions of years the energy of the sun's
rays had gone to form the vast vegetation of the Carboniferous era and
had been transformed, by various subtle processes, into the potential
energy that slumbers in those immense fossilized forests.

The exhaustion of our coal deposits would mean, so far as our knowledge
extends at present, the end of the world's civilisation. There are other
known sources of energy, it is true. There is the energy of falling
water; the great falls of Niagara are used to supply the energy of huge
electric power stations. Perhaps, also, something could be done to
utilise the energy of the tides--another instance of the energy of
moving water. And attempts have been made to utilise directly the energy
of the sun's rays. But all these sources of energy are small compared
with the energy of coal. A suggestion was made at a recent British
Association meeting that deep borings might be sunk in order to utilise
the internal heat of the earth, but this is not, perhaps, a very
practical proposal. By far the most effective substitutes for coal would
be found in the interior energy of the atom, a source of energy which,
as we have seen, is practically illimitable. If the immense electrical
energy in the interior of the atom can ever be liberated and controlled,
then our steadily decreasing coal supply will no longer be the bugbear
it now is to all thoughtful men.

The stored-up energy of the great coal-fields can be used up, but we
cannot replace it or create fresh supplies. As we have seen, energy
cannot be destroyed, but it can become _unavailable_. Let us consider
what this important fact means.


