IS THE SUN DYING?

§ 3

Now let us return to our consideration of the sun.

To us on the earth the most patent and most astonishing fact about the
sun is its tremendous energy. Heat and light in amazing quantities pour
from it without ceasing.

Where does this energy come from? Enormous jets of red glowing gases can
be seen shooting outwards from the sun, like flames from a fire, for
thousands of miles. Does this argue fire, as we know fire on the earth?
On this point the scientist is sure. The sun is not burning, and
combustion is not the source of its heat. Combustion is a chemical
reaction between atoms. The conditions that make it possible are known
and the results are predictable and measurable. But no chemical reaction
of the nature of combustion as we know it will explain the sun's energy,
nor indeed will any ordinary chemical reaction of any kind. If the sun
were composed of combustible material throughout and the conditions of
combustion as we understand them were always present, the sun would burn
itself out in some thousands of years, with marked changes in its heat
and light production as the process advanced. There is no evidence of
such changes. There is, instead, strong evidence that the sun has been
emitting light and heat in prodigious quantities, not for thousands, but
for millions of years. Every addition to our knowledge that throws light
on the sun's age seems to make for increase rather than decrease of its
years. This makes the wonder of its energy greater.

And we cannot avoid the issue of the source of the energy by saying
merely that the sun is gradually radiating away an energy that
originated in some unknown manner, away back at the beginning of things.
Reliable calculations show that the years required for the mere cooling
of a globe like the sun could not possibly run to millions. In other
words, the sun's energy must be subject to continuous and more or less
steady renewal. However it may have acquired its enormous energy in the
past, it must have some source of energy in the present.

The best explanation that we have to-day of this continuous accretion of
energy is that it is due to shrinkage of the sun's bulk under the force
of gravity. Gravity is one of the most mysterious forces of nature, but
it is an obvious fact that bodies behave as if they attracted one
another, and Newton worked out the law of this attraction. We may say,
without trying to go too deeply into things, that every particle of
matter attracts every other throughout the universe. If the diameter of
the sun were to shrink by one mile all round, this would mean that all
the millions of tons in the outer one-mile thickness would have a
straight drop of one mile towards the centre. And that is not all,
because obviously the layers below this outer mile would also drop
inwards, each to a less degree than the one above it. What a tremendous
movement of matter, however slowly it might take place! And what a
tremendous energy would be involved! Astronomers calculate that the
above shrinkage of one mile all round would require fifty years for its
completion, assuming, reasonably, that there is close and continuous
relationship between loss of heat by radiation and shrinkage. Even if
this were true we need not feel over-anxious on this theory; before the
sun became too cold to support life many millions of years would be
required.

It was suggested at one time that falls of meteoric matter into the sun
would account for the sun's heat. This position is hardly tenable now.
The mere bulk of the meteoric matter required by the hypothesis, apart
from other reasons, is against it. There is undoubtedly an enormous
amount of meteoric matter moving about within the bounds of the solar
system, but most of it seems to be following definite routes round the
sun like the planets. The stray erratic quantities destined to meet
their doom by collision with the sun can hardly be sufficient to account
for the sun's heat.

Recent study of radio-active bodies has suggested another factor that
may be working powerfully along with the force of gravitation to
maintain the sun's store of heat. In radio-active bodies certain atoms
seem to be undergoing disintegration. These atoms appear to be splitting
up into very minute and primitive constituents. But since matter may be
split up into such constituents, may it not be built up from them?

The question is whether these "radio-active" elements are undergoing
disintegration, or formation, in the sun. If they are undergoing
disintegration--and the sun itself is undoubtedly radio-active--then we
have another source of heat for the sun that will last indefinitely.




THE PLANETS

LIFE IN OTHER WORLDS?

§ 1

It is quite clear that there cannot be life on the stars. Nothing solid
or even liquid can exist in such furnaces as they are. Life exists only
on planets, and even on these its possibilities are limited. Whether all
the stars, or how many of them, have planetary families like our sun, we
cannot positively say. If they have, such planets would be too faint and
small to be visible tens of trillions of miles away. Some astronomers
think that our sun may be exceptional in having planets, but their
reasons are speculative and unconvincing. Probably a large proportion at
least of the stars have planets, and we may therefore survey the globes
of our own solar system and in a general way extend the results to the
rest of the universe.

In considering the possibility of life as we know it we may at once rule
out the most distant planets from the sun, Uranus and Neptune. They are
probably intrinsically too hot. We may also pass over the nearest planet
to the sun, Mercury. We have reason to believe that it turns on its axis
in the same period as it revolves round the sun, and it must therefore
always present the same side to the sun. This means that the heat on the
sunlit side of Mercury is above boiling-point, while the cold on the
other side must be between two and three hundred degrees below
freezing-point.


The Planet Venus

The planet Venus, the bright globe which is known to all as the morning
and evening "star," seems at first sight more promising as regards the
possibility of life. It is of nearly the same size as the earth, and it
has a good atmosphere, but there are many astronomers who believe that,
like Mercury, it always presents the same face to the sun, and it would
therefore have the same disadvantage--a broiling heat on the sunny side
and the cold of space on the opposite side. We are not sure. The
surface of Venus is so bright--the light of the sun is reflected to us
by such dense masses of cloud and dust--that it is difficult to trace
any permanent markings on it, and thus ascertain how long it takes to
rotate on its axis. Many astronomers believe that they have succeeded,
and that the planet always turns the same face to the sun. If it does,
we can hardly conceive of life on its surface, in spite of the
cloud-screen.

[Illustration: FIG. 14.--THE MOON

Showing a great plain and some typical craters. There are thousands of
these craters, and some theories of their origin are explained on page
34.]

[Illustration: FIG. 15.--MARS

 1} Drawings by Prof. Lowell to accompany actual photographs of Mars
     showing many of the
 2} canals. Taken in 1907 by Mr. E. C. Slipher of the Lowell Observatory.
 3 Drawing by Prof. Lowell made January 6, 1914.
 4 Drawing by Prof. Lowell made January 21, 1914.

Nos. 1 and 2 show the effect of the planet's rotation. Nos. 3 and 4
depict quite different sections. Note the change in the polar snow-caps
in the last two.]

[Illustration: FIG. 16.--THE MOON, AT NINE AND THREE-QUARTER DAYS

Note the mysterious "rays" diverging from the almost perfectly circular
craters indicated by the arrows (Tycho, upper; Copernicus, lower), and
also the mountains to the right with the lunar dawn breaking on them.]

We turn to Mars; and we must first make it clear why there is so much
speculation about life on Mars, and why it is supposed that, if there
_is_ life on Mars, it must be more advanced than life on the earth.


Is there Life on Mars?

The basis of this belief is that if, as we saw, all the globes in our
solar system are masses of metal that are cooling down, the smaller will
have cooled down before the larger, and will be further ahead in their
development. Now Mars is very much smaller than the earth, and must have
cooled at its surface millions of years before the earth did. Hence, if
a story of life began on Mars at all, it began long before the story of
life on the earth. We cannot guess what sort of life-forms would be
evolved in a different world, but we can confidently say that they would
tend toward increasing intelligence; and thus we are disposed to look
for highly intelligent beings on Mars.

But this argument supposes that the conditions of life, namely air and
water, are found on Mars, and it is disputed whether they are found
there in sufficient quantity. The late Professor Percival Lowell, who
made a lifelong study of Mars, maintained that there are hundreds of
straight lines drawn across the surface of the planet, and he claimed
that they are beds of vegetation marking the sites of great channels or
pipes by means of which the "Martians" draw water from their polar
ocean. Professor W. H. Pickering, another high authority, thinks that
the lines are long, narrow marshes fed by moist winds from the poles.
There are certainly white polar caps on Mars. They seem to melt in the
spring, and the dark fringe round them grows broader.

Other astronomers, however, say that they find no trace of water-vapour
in the atmosphere of Mars, and they think that the polar caps may be
simply thin sheets of hoar-frost or frozen gas. They point out that, as
the atmosphere of Mars is certainly scanty, and the distance from the
sun is so great, it may be too cold for the fluid water to exist on the
planet.

If one asks why our wonderful instruments cannot settle these points,
one must be reminded that Mars is never nearer than 34,000,000 miles
from the earth, and only approaches to this distance once in fifteen or
seventeen years. The image of Mars on the photographic negative taken in
a big telescope is very small. Astronomers rely to a great extent on the
eye, which is more sensitive than the photographic plate. But it is easy
to have differences of opinion as to what the eye sees, and so there is
a good deal of controversy.

In August, 1924, the planet will again be well placed for observation,
and we may learn more about it. Already a few of the much-disputed
lines, which people wrongly call "canals," have been traced on
photographs. Astronomers who are sceptical about life on Mars are often
not fully aware of the extraordinary adaptability of life. There was a
time when the climate of the whole earth, from pole to pole, was
semi-tropical for millions of years. No animal could then endure the
least cold, yet now we have plenty of Arctic plants and animals. If the
cold came slowly on Mars, as we have reason to suppose, the population
could be gradually adapted to it. On the whole, it is possible that
there is advanced life on Mars, and it is not impossible, in spite of
the very great difficulties of a code of communication, that our "elder
brothers" may yet flash across space the solution of many of our
problems.

