Animal Intelligence

The higher reaches of the inclined plane of behaviour show intelligence
in the strict sense. They include those kinds of behaviour which cannot
be described without the suggestion that the animal makes some sort of
perceptual inference, not only profiting by experience but learning by
ideas. Such intelligent actions show great individual variability; they
are plastic and adjustable in a manner rarely hinted at in connection
with instincts where routine cannot be departed from without the
creature being nonplussed; they are not bound up with particular
circumstances as instinctive actions are, but imply an appreciative
awareness of relations.

When there is an experimenting with general ideas, when there is
_conceptual_ as contrasted with _perceptual_ inference, we speak of
Reason, but there is no evidence of this below the level of man. It is
not, indeed, always that we can credit man with rational conduct, but he
has the possibility of it ever within his reach.

Animal instinct and intelligence will be illustrated in another part of
this work. We are here concerned simply with the general question of the
evolution of behaviour. There is a main line of tentative experimental
behaviour both below and above the level of intelligence, and it has
been part of the tactics of evolution to bring about the hereditary
enregistration of capacities of effective response, the advantages being
that the answers come more rapidly and that the creature is left free,
if it chooses, for higher adventures.

There is no doubt as to the big fact that in the course of evolution
animals have shown an increasing complexity and masterfulness of
behaviour, that they have become at once more controlled and more
definitely free agents, and that the inner aspect of the
behaviour--experimenting, learning, thinking, feeling, and willing--has
come to count for more and more.


§ 3

Evolution of Parental Care

Mammals furnish a crowning instance of a trend of evolution which
expresses itself at many levels--the tendency to bring forth the young
at a well-advanced stage and to an increase of parental care associated
with a decrease in the number of offspring. There is a British starfish
called _Luidia_ which has two hundred millions of eggs in a year, and
there are said to be several millions of eggs in conger-eels and some
other fishes. These illustrate the spawning method of solving the
problem of survival. Some animals are naturally prolific, and the number
of eggs which they sow broadcast in the waters allows for enormous
infantile mortality and obviates any necessity for parental care.

But some other creatures, by nature less prolific, have found an
entirely different solution of the problem. They practise parental care
and they secure survival with greatly economised reproduction. This is a
trend of evolution particularly characteristic of the higher animals. So
much so that Herbert Spencer formulated the generalisation that the size
and frequency of the animal family is inverse ratio to the degree of
evolution to which the animal has attained.

Now there are many different methods of parental care which secure the
safety of the young, and one of these is called viviparity. The young
ones are not liberated from the parent until they are relatively well
advanced and more or less able to look after themselves. This gives the
young a good send-off in life, and their chances of death are greatly
reduced. In other words, the animals that have varied in the direction
of economised reproduction may keep their foothold in the struggle for
existence if they have varied at the same time in the direction of
parental care. In other cases it may have worked the other way round.

In the interesting archaic animal called _Peripatus_, which has to face
a modern world too severe for it, one of the methods of meeting the
environing difficulties is the retention of the offspring for many
months within the mother, so that it is born a fully-formed creature.
There are only a few offspring at a time, and, although there are
exceptional cases like the summer green-flies, which are very prolific
though viviparous, the general rule is that viviparity is associated
with a very small family. The case of flowering plants stands by itself,
for although they illustrate a kind of viviparity, the seed being
embryos, an individual plant may have a large number of flowers and
therefore a huge family.

Viviparity naturally finds its best illustrations among terrestrial
animals, where the risks to the young life are many, and it finds its
climax among mammals.

Now it is an interesting fact that the three lowest mammals, the
Duckmole and two Spiny Ant-eaters, lay eggs, i.e. are oviparous; that
the Marsupials, on the next grade, bring forth their young, as it were,
prematurely, and in most cases stow them away in an external pouch;
while all the others--the Placentals--show a more prolonged ante-natal
life and an intimate partnership between the mother and the unborn
young.


§ 4

There is another way of looking at the sublime process of evolution. It
has implied a mastery of all the possible haunts of life; it has been a
progressive conquest of the environment.

1. It is highly probable that living organisms found their foothold in
the stimulating conditions of the shore of the sea--the shallow water,
brightly illumined, seaweed-growing shelf fringing the Continents. This
littoral zone was a propitious environment where sea and fresh water,
earth and air all meet, where there is stimulating change, abundant
oxygenation and a copious supply of nutritive material in what the
streams bring down and in the rich seaweed vegetation.

[Illustration: THE HOATZIN INHABITS BRITISH GUIANA

The newly hatched bird has claws on its thumb and first finger and so is
enabled to climb on the branches of trees with great dexterity until
such time as the wings are strong enough to sustain it in flight.]

[Illustration: _Photograph, from the British Museum (Natural History),
of a drawing by Mr. E. Wilson._

PERIPATUS

A widely distributed old-fashioned type of animal, somewhat like a
permanent caterpillar. It has affinities both with worms and with
insects. It has a velvety skin, minute diamond-like eyes, and short
stump-like legs. A defenceless, weaponless animal, it comes out at
night, and is said to capture small insects by squirting jets of slime
from its mouth.]

[Illustration: _Photo: W. S. Berridge, F.Z.S._

ROCK KANGAROO CARRYING ITS YOUNG IN A POUCH

The young are born so helpless that they cannot even suck. The mother
places them in the external pouch, and fitting their mouths on the teats
injects the milk. After a time the young ones go out and in as they
please.]

It is not an easy haunt of life, but none the worse for that, and it is
tenanted to-day by representatives of practically every class of animals
from infusorians to seashore birds and mammals.


The Cradle of the Open Sea

2. The open-sea or pelagic haunt includes all the brightly illumined
surface waters beyond the shallow water of the shore area.

It is perhaps the easiest of all the haunts of life, for there is no
crowding, there is considerable uniformity, and an abundance of food for
animals is afforded by the inexhaustible floating "sea-meadows" of
microscopic Algæ. These are reincarnated in minute animals like the
open-sea crustaceans, which again are utilised by fishes, these in turn
making life possible for higher forms like carnivorous turtles and
toothed whales. It is quite possible that the open sea was the original
cradle of life and perhaps Professor Church is right in picturing a long
period of pelagic life before there was any sufficiently shallow water
to allow the floating plants to anchor. It is rather in favour of this
view that many shore animals such as crabs and starfishes, spend their
youthful stages in the relatively safe cradle of the open sea, and only
return to the more strenuous conditions of their birthplace after they
have gained considerable strength of body. It is probably safe to say
that the honour of being the original cradle of life lies between the
shore of the sea and the open sea.


The Great Deeps

3. A third haunt of life is the floor of the Deep Sea, the abyssal area,
which occupies more than a half of the surface of the globe. It is a
region of extreme cold--an eternal winter; of utter darkness--an eternal
night--relieved only by the fitful gleams of "phosphorescent" animals;
of enormous pressure--2-1/2 tons on the square inch at a depth of 2,500
fathoms; of profound calm, unbroken silence, immense monotony. And as
there are no plants in the great abysses, the animals must live on one
another, and, in the long run, on the rain of moribund animalcules which
sink from the surface through the miles of water. It seems a very
unpromising haunt of life, but it is abundantly tenanted, and it gives
us a glimpse of the insurgent nature of the living creature that the
difficulties of the Deep Sea should have been so effectively conquered.
It is probable that the colonising of the great abysses took place in
relatively recent times, for the fauna does not include many very
antique types. It is practically certain that the colonisation was due
to littoral animals which followed the food-débris, millennium after
millennium, further and further down the long slope from the shore.


The Freshwaters

4. A fourth haunt of life is that of the freshwaters, including river
and lake, pond and pool, swamp and marsh. It may have been colonised by
gradual migration up estuaries and rivers, or by more direct passage
from the seashore into the brackish swamp. Or it may have been in some
cases that partially landlocked corners of ancient seas became gradually
turned into freshwater basins. The animal population of the freshwaters
is very representative, and is diversely adapted to meet the
characteristic contingencies--the risk of being dried up, the risk of
being frozen hard in winter, and the risk of being left high and dry
after floods or of being swept down to the sea.


Conquest of the Dry Land

5. The terrestrial haunt has been invaded age after age by contingents
from the sea or from the freshwaters. We must recognise the worm
invasion, which led eventually to the making of the fertile soil, the
invasion due to air-breathing Arthropods, which led eventually to the
important linkage between flowers and their insect visitors, and the
invasion due to air-breathing Amphibians, which led eventually to the
higher terrestrial animals and to the development of intelligence and
family affection. Besides these three great invasions, there were minor
ones such as that leading to land-snails, for there has been a
widespread and persistent tendency among aquatic animals to try to
possess the dry land.

Getting on to dry land had a manifold significance.

It implied getting into a medium with a much larger supply of oxygen
than there is dissolved in the water. But the oxygen of the air is more
difficult to capture, especially when the skin becomes hard or well
protected, as it is almost bound to become in animals living on dry
ground. Thus this leads to the development of _internal surfaces_, such
as those of lungs, where the oxygen taken into the body may be absorbed
by the blood. In most animals the blood goes to the surface of
oxygen-capture; but in insects and their relatives there is a different
idea--of taking the air to the blood or in greater part to the area of
oxygen-combustion, the living tissues. A system of branching air-tubes
takes air into every hole and corner of the insect's body, and this
thorough aeration is doubtless in part the secret of the insect's
intense activity. The blood never becomes impure.

The conquest of the dry land also implied a predominance of that kind of
locomotion which may be compared to punting, when the body is pushed
along by pressing a lever against a hard substratum. And it also
followed that with few exceptions the body of the terrestrial animal
tended to be compact, readily lifted off the ground by the limbs or
adjusted in some other way so that there may not be too large a surface
trailing on the ground. An animal like a jellyfish, easily supported in
the water, would be impossible on land. Such apparent exceptions as
earthworms, centipedes, and snakes are not difficult to explain, for the
earthworm is a burrower which eats its way through the soil, the
centipede's long body is supported by numerous hard legs, and the snake
pushes itself along by means of the large ventral scales to which the
lower ends of very numerous ribs are attached.


Methods of Mastering the Difficulties of Terrestrial Life

A great restriction attendant on the invasion of the dry land is that
locomotion becomes limited to one plane, namely, the surface of the
earth. This is in great contrast to what is true in the water, where the
animal can move up or down, to right or to left, at any angle and in
three dimensions. It surely follows from this that the movements of land
animals must be rapid and precise, unless, indeed, safety is secured in
some other way. Hence it is easy to understand why most land animals
have very finely developed striped muscles, and why a beetle running on
the ground has far more numerous muscles than a lobster swimming in the
sea.

Land animals were also handicapped by the risks of drought and of frost,
but these were met by defences of the most diverse description, from the
hairs of woolly caterpillars to the fur of mammals, from the carapace of
tortoises to the armour of armadillos. In other cases, it is hardly
necessary to say, the difficulties may be met in other ways, as frogs
meet the winter by falling into a lethargic state in some secluded
retreat.

Another consequence of getting on to dry land is that the eggs or young
can no longer be set free anyhow, as is possible when the animal is
surrounded by water, which is in itself more or less of a cradle. If the
eggs were laid or the young liberated on dry ground, the chances are
many that they would be dried up or devoured. So there are numerous ways
in which land animals secure the safety of their young, e.g. by burying
them in the ground, or by hiding them in nests, or by carrying them
about for a prolonged period either before or after birth. This may mean
great safety for the young, this may make it possible to have only a
small family, and this may tend to the evolution of parental care and
the kindly emotions. Thus it may be understood that from the conquest of
the land many far-reaching consequences have followed.

[Illustration: _Photo: Rischgitz._

PROFESSOR THOMAS HENRY HUXLEY (1825-95)

One of the most distinguished of zoologists, with unsurpassed gifts as a
teacher and expositor. He did great service in gaining a place for
science in ordinary education and in popular estimation. No one
championed Evolutionism with more courage and skill.]

[Illustration: BARON CUVIER, 1769-1832

One of the founders of modern Comparative Anatomy. A man of gigantic
intellect, who came to Paris as a youth from the provinces, and became
the director of the higher education of France and a peer of the Empire.
He was opposed to Evolutionist ideas, but he had anatomical genius.]

[Illustration: AN ILLUSTRATION SHOWING VARIOUS METHODS OF FLYING AND
SWOOPING

Gull, with a feather-wing, a true flier. Fox-bat, with a skin-wing, a
true flier. Flying Squirrel, with a parachute of skin, able to swoop
from tree to tree, but not to fly. Flying Fish, with pectoral fins used
as volplanes in a great leap due to the tail. To some extent able to
sail in albatros fashion.]

Finally, it is worth dwelling on the risks of terrestrial life, because
they enable us better to understand why so many land animals have become
burrowers and others climbers of trees, why some have returned to the
water and others have taken to the air. It may be asked, perhaps, why
the land should have been colonised at all when the risks and
difficulties are so great. The answer must be that necessity and
curiosity are the mother and father of invention. Animals left the water
because the pools dried up, or because they were overcrowded, or because
of inveterate enemies, but also because of that curiosity and spirit of
adventure which, from first to last, has been one of the spurs of
progress.


Conquering the Air

6. The last great haunt of life is the air, a mastery of which must be
placed to the credit of insects, Pterodactyls, birds, and bats. These
have been the successes, but it should be noted that there have been
many brilliant failures, which have not attained to much more than
parachuting. These include the Flying Fishes, which take leaps from the
water and are carried for many yards and to considerable heights,
holding their enlarged pectoral fins taut or with little more than a
slight fluttering. There is a so-called Flying Frog (_Rhacophorus_) that
skims from branch to branch, and the much more effective Flying Dragon
(_Draco volans_) of the Far East, which has been mentioned already.
Among mammals there are Flying Phalangers, Flying Lemurs, and more
besides, all attaining to great skill as parachutists, and illustrating
the endeavour to master the air which man has realised in a way of his
own.

The power of flight brings obvious advantages. A bird feeding on the
ground is able to evade the stalking carnivore by suddenly rising into
the air; food and water can be followed rapidly and to great distances;
the eggs or the young can be placed in safe situations; and birds in
their migrations have made a brilliant conquest both of time and space.
Many of them know no winter in their year, and the migratory flight of
the Pacific Golden Plover from Hawaii to Alaska and back again does not
stand alone.


THE PROCESSION OF LIFE THROUGH THE AGES

§ 1

The Rock Record

How do we know when the various classes of animals and plants were
established on the earth? How do we know the order of their appearance
and the succession of their advances? The answer is: by reading the Rock
Record. In the course of time the crust of the earth has been elevated
into continents and depressed into ocean-troughs, and the surface of the
land has been buckled up into mountain ranges and folded in gentler
hills and valleys. The high places of the land have been weathered by
air and water in many forms, and the results of the weathering have been
borne away by rivers and seas, to be laid down again elsewhere as
deposits which eventually formed sandstones, mudstones, and similar
sedimentary rocks. Much of the material of the original crust has thus
been broken down and worked up again many times over, and if the total
thickness of the sedimentary rocks is added up it amounts, according to
some geologists, to a total of 67 miles. In most cases, however, only a
small part of this thickness is to be seen in one place, for the
deposits were usually formed in limited areas at any one time.


The Use of Fossils

When the sediments were accumulating age after age, it naturally came
about that remains of the plants and animals living at the time were
buried, and these formed the fossils by the aid of which it is possible
to read the story of the past. By careful piecing together of evidence
the geologist is able to determine the order in which the different
sedimentary rocks were laid down, and thus to say, for instance, that
the Devonian period was the time of the origin of Amphibians. In other
cases the geologist utilises the fossils in his attempt to work out the
order of the strata when these have been much disarranged. For the
simpler fossil forms of any type must be older than those that are more
complex. There is no vicious circle here, for the general succession of
strata is clear, and it is quite certain that there were fishes before
there were amphibians, and amphibians before there were reptiles, and
reptiles before there were birds and mammals. In certain cases, e.g. of
fossil horses and elephants, the actual historical succession has been
clearly worked out.

If the successive strata contained good samples of all the plants and
animals living at the time when the beds were formed, then it would be
easy to read the record of the rocks, but many animals were too soft to
become satisfactory fossils, many were eaten or dissolved away, many
were destroyed by heat and pressure, so that the rock record is like a
library very much damaged by fire and looting and decay.


§ 2

The Geological Time-table

The long history of the earth and its inhabitants is conveniently
divided into eras. Thus, just as we speak of the ancient, mediæval, and
modern history of mankind, so we may speak of Palæozoic, Mesozoic and
Cenozoic eras in the history of the earth as a whole.

Geologists cannot tell us except in an approximate way how long the
process of evolution has taken. One of the methods is to estimate how
long has been required for the accumulation of the salts of the sea,
for all these have been dissolved out of the rocks since rain began to
fall on the earth. Dividing the total amount of saline matter by what is
contributed every year in modern times, we get about a hundred million
years as the age of the sea. But as the present rate of
salt-accumulation is probably much greater than it was during many of
the geological periods, the prodigious age just mentioned is in all
likelihood far below the mark. Another method is to calculate how long
it would take to form the sedimentary rocks, like sandstones and
mudstones, which have a _total_ thickness of over fifty miles, though
the _local_ thickness is rarely over a mile. As most of the materials
have come from the weathering of the earth's crust, and as the annual
amount of weathering now going on can be estimated, the time required
for the formation of the sedimentary rocks of the world can be
approximately calculated. There are some other ways of trying to tell
the earth's age and the length of the successive periods, but no
certainty has been reached.

The eras marked on the table (page 92) as _before the Cambrian_
correspond to about thirty-two miles of thickness of strata; and all the
subsequent eras with fossil-bearing rocks to a thickness of about
twenty-one miles--in itself an astounding fact. Perhaps thirty million
years must be allotted to the Pre-Cambrian eras, eighteen to the
Palæozoic, nine to the Mesozoic, three to the Cenozoic, making a grand
total of sixty millions.


The Establishment of Invertebrate Stocks

It is an astounding fact that at least half of geological time (the
Archæozoic and Proterozoic eras) passed before there were living
creatures with parts sufficiently hard to form fossils. In the latter
part of the Proterozoic era there are traces of one-celled marine
animals (Radiolarians) with shells of flint, and of worms that wallowed
in the primal mud. It is plain that as regards the most primitive
creatures the rock record tells us little.

[Illustration: _From Knipe's "Nebula to Man."_

ANIMALS OF THE CAMBRIAN PERIOD e.g. Sponges, Jellyfish, Starfish,
Sea-lilies, Water-fleas, and Trilobites]

[Illustration: _Photo: J. J. Ward, F.E.S._

A TRILOBITE

Trilobites were ancient seashore animals, abundant from the Upper
Cambrian to the Carboniferous eras. They have no direct descendants
to-day. They were jointed-footed animals, allied to Crustaceans and
perhaps also to King-crabs. They were able to roll themselves up in
their ring-armour.]

[Illustration: _Photo: British Museum (Natural History)._

THE GAMBIAN MUD-FISH, PROTOPTERUS

It can breathe oxygen dissolved in water by its gills; it can also
breathe dry air by means of its swim-bladder, which has become a lung.
It is a _double-breather_, showing evolution in process. For seven
months of the year, the dry season, it can remain inert in the mud,
getting air through an open pipe to the surface. When water fills the
pools it can use its gills again. Mud-nests or mud encasements with the
lung-fish inside have often been brought to Britain and the fish when
liberated were quite lively.]

[Illustration: THE ARCHÆOPTERYX

(_After William Leche of Stockholm._)

A good restoration of the oldest known bird, Archæopteryx (Jurassic
Era). It was about the size of a crow; it had teeth on both jaws; it had
claws on the thumb and two fingers; and it had a long lizard-like tail.
But it had feathers, proving itself a true bird.]

[Illustration: WING OF A BIRD, SHOWING THE ARRANGEMENT OF THE FEATHERS

The longest feathers or primaries (PR) are borne by the two fingers (2
and 3), and their palm-bones (CMC); the second longest or secondaries
are borne by the ulna bone (U) of the fore-arm; there is a separate tuft
(AS) on the thumb (TH).]

The rarity of direct traces of life in the oldest rocks is partly due to
the fact that the primitive animals would be of delicate build, but it
must also be remembered that the ancient rocks have been profoundly and
repeatedly changed by pressure and heat, so that the traces which did
exist would be very liable to obliteration. And if it be asked what
right we have to suppose the presence of living creatures in the absence
or extreme rarity of fossils, we must point to great accumulations of
limestone which indicate the existence of calcareous algæ, and to
deposits of iron which probably indicate the activity of iron-forming
Bacteria. Ancient beds of graphite similarly suggest that green plants
flourished in these ancient days.


§ 3

The Era of Ancient Life (Palæozoic)

The _Cambrian_ period was the time of the establishment of the chief
stocks of backboneless animals such as sponges, jellyfishes, worms,
sea-cucumbers, lamp-shells, trilobites, crustaceans, and molluscs. There
is something very eloquent in the broad fact that the peopling of the
seas had definitely begun some thirty million years ago, for Professor
H. F. Osborn points out that in the Cambrian period there was already a
colonisation of the shore of the sea, the open sea, and the deep waters.

The _Ordovician_ period was marked by abundant representation of the
once very successful class of Trilobites--jointed-footed,
antenna-bearing, segmented marine animals, with numerous appendages and
a covering of chitin. They died away entirely with the end of the
Palæozoic era. Also very notable was the abundance of predatory
cuttlefishes, the bullies of the ancient seas. But it was in this period
that the first backboned animals made their appearance--an epoch-making
step in evolution. In other words, true fishes were evolved--destined in
the course of ages to replace the cuttlefishes (which are mere molluscs)
in dominating the seas.
